ECB guide to internal 
models 


P:\General\EUD\Word\ECB Templates\Logo\SSM\SSM_EN_RGB.emf
June 2023 





Document releases 


Release 

Date of issue 

Release number 

Sections/Chapters 
modified 

Rationale underlying the 
release 

Guide for the Targeted Review of 
Internal Models (TRIM) – First 
version 

17/02/2017 

1.0 



- 

Public Consultation – ECB guide 
to internal models – general topics 
chapter 

28/03/2018 

2.0a 

General topics 

Incorporation of institutions’ 
feedback on version 1.0, 
outcomes of the supervisory 
review on general topics, 
and related horizontal 
analyses 

Public Consultation – ECB guide 
to internal models – risk-type-
specific chapters 

07/09/2018 

2.0b 

Credit risk, market 
risk and counterparty 
credit risk 

Incorporation of institutions’ 
feedback on version 1.0 and 
experience gained with TRIM 
investigations; addition of 
dedicated principles for low-
default portfolios 

Revised ECB guide to internal 
models – general topics chapter 

15/11/2018 

2.1a 

General topics 

Inclusion of industry’s 
feedback received during the 
public consultation 

Revised ECB guide to internal 
models – risk-type-specific 
chapters 

08/07/2019 

2.1b 

Credit risk, market 
risk and counterparty 
credit risk 

Inclusion of industry’s 
feedback received during the 
public consultation 

Consolidated version 

01/10/2019 

2.2 

Consolidated 
document 

Compilation of the general 
topics and risk-type-specific 
chapters in one consolidated 
document 

Public Consultation – Revised ECB 
guide to internal models 

22/06/2023 

3.0 

Consolidated 
document 

Inclusion of revisions to 
reflect developments in 
regulatory requirements and 
to reflect the experience of 
the use of the guide 



 



Contents 
Foreword 
3 
General topics 
5 
1 Overarching principles for internal models 
5 
2 Roll-out and permanent partial use 
13 
3 Internal governance 
20 
4 Internal validation 
25 
5 Internal audit 
34 
6 Model use 
37 
7 Management of changes to the IRB approach 
46 
8 Third-party involvement 
52 
Credit risk 
59 
1 Scope of the credit risk chapter 
59 
2 Data maintenance for the IRB approach 
59 
3 Use of data 
69 
4 Definition of default 
77 
5 Probability of default 
90 
6 Loss given default 
112 
7 Conversion factors 
132 
8 Model-related MoC 
140 
9 Review of estimates 
142 
10 Calculation of maturity for non-retail exposures 
144 
Market risk 
145 
1 Scope of the market risk chapter 
145 
2 Scope of the internal model approach 
146 
3 Regulatory back-testing of VaR models 
162 
4 Aspects of internal validation of market risk models 
172 
5 Methodology for VaR and stressed VaR 
177 
6 Methodology for IRC models focusing on default risk 
190 
7 Risks-not-in-the-model engines 
203 
Counterparty credit risk 
215 
1 Scope of the counterparty credit risk chapter 
215 
2 Trade coverage 
215 
3 Margin period of risk and cash flows 
221 
4 Collateral modelling 
229 
5 Modelling of initial margin 
234 
6 Maturity 
235 
7 Granularity, number of time steps and scenarios 
238 
8 Calibration frequency and stress calibration 
240 
9 Use test 
242 
10 Validation 
245 
11 Effective expected positive exposure 
252 
12 Alpha parameter 
253 
13 Risks not in effective expected positive exposure 
255 
Annex 
270 
A.1 Method 1 
270 
A.2 Method 2 
272 
A.3 Aggregation across netting sets 
275 
Acronyms 
276 
Glossary 
277 

Foreword 


1. Articles 143, 283 and 363 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR)1 require the 
European Central Bank (ECB) to grant permission to use internal models for 
credit risk, counterparty credit risk and market risk where the requirements set 
out in the corresponding chapters of the CRR are met by the institution(s) 
concerned. Based on the current applicable European Union (EU) and national 
law, the ECB guide to internal models provides transparency on how the ECB 
understands those rules and how it intends to apply them when assessing 
whether institutions meet these requirements. 
2. The guide is also intended as a document for the internal use of the different 
supervisory teams, with the aim of ensuring a common and consistent approach 
to matters related to internal models. When applying the relevant regulatory 
framework in specific cases, the ECB will take into due consideration the 
particular circumstances of the institution concerned. 
3. This guide should not be construed as going beyond the current existing 
applicable EU law including, among others, adopted regulatory technical 
standards (RTS), and national law and therefore is not intended to replace or 
overrule applicable EU and national law. 


1 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on 
prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 
648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1), referred to in this guide as the “CRR”. 


2 
Final draft Regulatory Technical Standards on the specification of the assessment methodology for 
competent authorities regarding compliance of an institution with the requirements to use internal 
models for market risk and assessment of significant share under points (b) and (c) of Article 
363(4) of 
Regulation (EU) No 
575/2013 (EBA/RTS/2016/07), referred to in this guide as the “Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share”. 
Note that there are no RTS on assessment methodology mandated for the assessment of the Internal 
Model Method (IMM) for calculating counterparty credit risk (CCR) exposures. 


In accordance with the requirements set out in the CRR, the European Banking 
Authority (EBA) has drafted RTS. These include the Final draft RTS on the 
specification of the assessment methodology for competent authorities 
regarding compliance of an institution with the requirement to use internal 
models for market risk and assessment of significant share.2 This specifies how 
competent authorities should assess compliance with the regulatory framework 
defined in the CRR. The Final draft RTS has not yet been adopted by the 
European Commission, but those Final draft RTS is referred to in the guide as 
good practice for interpretative purposes. Some parts of this guide may require 
revision once the European Commission has adopted the RTS by means of a 
Delegated Regulation. The ECB will amend or delete those parts of the guide 
when the RTS enters into force. 


In addition, based on drafts prepared by the EBA, the European Commission 
has adopted Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2021/9303 and 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/4394. Some parts of this 
guide have been revised and amended in line with the adoption of these 
regulations. 


3 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/930 of 1 March 2021 supplementing the CRR with 
regard to regulatory technical standards specifying the nature, severity and duration of an economic 
downturn referred to in Article 181(1), point (b), and Article 182(1), point (b), of that Regulation (OJ L 
204, 10.6.2021, p. 1). 


4 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/439 of 20 October 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 
No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical 
standards for the specification of the assessment methodology competent authorities are to follow 
when assessing the compliance of credit institutions and investment firms with the requirements to use 
the Internal Ratings Based Approach (OJ L 90, 18.3.2022, p. 1). 


5 
Regulation (EU) 2019/876 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2019 amending 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 as regards the leverage ratio, the net stable funding ratio, requirements 
for own funds and eligible liabilities, counterparty credit risk, market risk, exposures to central 
counterparties, exposures to collective investment undertakings, large exposures, reporting and 
disclosure requirements, and Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 150, 7.6.2019, p. 1). 


The ECB provides in this guide its understanding of the CRR provisions which 
apply currently. The legal references in this guide to the CRR provisions 
(including the article numbers) are references to the CRR. This includes the 
amendments to the CRR introduced by Regulation (EU) 2019/8765, except for 
those which relate to the alternative internal models approach (Chapter 1b). 
The amendments relating to the alternative internal models approach have 
been introduced as a specific reporting requirement for market risk as set out in 
Article 430b(3) of Regulation (EU) 2019/876. This specific reporting requirement 
will only come into force in the future (on the adoption of the relevant delegated 
acts referred to in Article 461a of the CRR). 


 



General topics 


1 Overarching principles for internal models 


1.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 1 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
2022/439 

20/10/2021 

3, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 
17, 30, 31, 32 

 

CRD IV,1 as implemented in the relevant 
national law 

26/06/2013 

3, 76, 85 

Paragraph 1, sub-
paragraphs 7, 9 and 11 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

175, 179, 185, 189, 190, 
191, 287, 288, 292, 293, 
368 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

Final draft RTS on assessment methodology 
for IMA and significant share2 

22/11/2016 

7-34 

 

EBA Guidelines on SREP3 

18/03/2022 

235 

EBA Guidelines on internal governance4 

21/03/2018 

Section 22 



1 
Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the 
activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, 
amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176, 
27.6.2013, p. 338), referred to in this guide as “CRD”. 


2 
Final draft Regulatory Technical Standards on the specification of the assessment methodology for 
competent authorities regarding compliance of an institution with the requirements to use internal 
models for market risk and assessment of significant share under points (b) and (c) of Article 363(4) of 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA/RTS/2016/07), referred to in this guide as the “Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share”. 


3 
EBA Guidelines on common procedures and methodologies for the supervisory review and evaluation 
process (SREP) and supervisory stress testing under Directive 2013/36/EU (EBA/GL/2022/03), 
referred to in this guide as the “EBA Guidelines on SREP”. 


4 
EBA Guidelines on internal governance (EBA/GL/2017/11), referred to in this guide as the “EBA 
Guidelines on internal governance”. 


 


Currently the RTS on assessment methodology for IMA and significant share 
only exist in the final draft version. Once adopted, these RTS will become an 
additional relevant regulatory reference for this guide. 


1. The principles listed in this section relate to internal models that are subject to 
supervisory approval for the calculation of own funds requirements for credit, 
market and counterparty credit risk (Pillar 1 models), unless stated otherwise. 


1.2 Guidelines at consolidated and subsidiary levels 


2. An inconsistent implementation of internal model-related tasks within a banking 
group bears the risk of an inappropriate coverage of the risks measured by 



internal models at group level. Therefore, institutions should either develop 
binding group-wide (i.e. consolidated) principles and guidelines relating to the 
life cycle5 of internal models6, or ensure that each relevant entity has 
appropriate and independently audited principles and guidelines in place with a 
high degree of consistency between one another. 
3. A consistent and integrated level of application of the group principles and 
guidelines in the relevant entities is expected. This could be ensured by 
applying controls that verify that these principles are implemented correctly in 
all relevant entities. Examples of such controls include periodic monitoring 
procedures by the parent entity on implementation at local level or a gap 
analysis between group-wide principles and local application, including local 
guidelines. These controls can be used to identify those gaps and to mitigate 
any associated risk. The group-level policies should clearly define under which 
circumstances deviations from the group-wide principles would be accepted. 
The parent entity should be informed about such deviations. The effective 
implementation of the policies should be periodically monitored and assessed. 


5 
The model life cycle generally includes the following steps: development (including data preparation), 
calibration (including data preparation), validation, supervisory approval (if necessary), implementation 
in internal processes, application and review of estimates. 


6 
In the case of credit risk, “internal models” should be read hereinafter as “IRB rating systems”. 


7 
Regarding credit risk, Article 32 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 specifies the 
contents of a register of rating systems. 


1.3 Documentation of internal models 


4. All internal models should be documented to allow a qualified third party to 
independently understand the methodology, assumptions, limitations and use of 
the model and to replicate its development and implementation. 
5. The institution should therefore define principles and guidelines for model 
documentation. These should encompass guidance for the governance of the 
model documentation itself. The scope of the model documentation should be 
defined by type of model. In-scope areas should include at least the technical 
aspects of the model (methodology and assumptions), data (processes), 
instructions for model users and performance/validation (including the results of 
implementation testing). 
6. The institution should be able to demonstrate how its documentation and the 
register of its internal models facilitate the internal and external understanding 
of the models. The institution can choose to have one or more registers for 
models in use, according to the different risk types (credit, market or 
counterparty credit risk). The register(s) should contain at least the following 
information for each model:7 the model owner(s), range of application, 
materiality, approval date, potential restrictions on the model’s use (e.g. 
conditions), as well as the key model weaknesses, main changes applied and 



change versioning. The register should also include models purchased from 
third-party vendors. 
7. Adequate controls of the register of the institution’s internal models, together 
with an inventory of the documentation, including an annual review, should be in 
place. This includes a policy for document management that clearly states the 
roles and responsibilities involved in approving documents, as well as how 
changes in documentation are applied and communicated internally. In addition, 
the institution should have a policy regarding the adequate archiving and 
maintenance of information, access permissions and the assessment of the 
completeness and consistency of the information held. 
8. Documentation should be kept up to date and the institution should keep 
documents for an appropriate period of time, taking into account legal or 
regulatory retention periods. 


1.4 Implementation of a model risk management framework 


9. Effective model risk management allows institutions to reduce the risk of 
potential losses and underestimation of own funds requirements as a result of 
flaws in the development, implementation or use of the models. To mitigate 
these risks, institutions should have a model risk management framework8 in 
place that allows them to identify, understand and manage their model risk for 
internal models across the group. This framework should comprise, at least, the 
following. 
(a) A written model risk management policy. This policy should, as a minimum, 
include a concept or a definition of what constitutes a model, provide the 
institution’s interpretation of model risk9 and describe the model risk 
framework with reference to its different components (e.g. model 
governance, risk control function, validation function, internal audit) and 
their related documented policies. 
(b) A register of the institution’s internal models, as described in paragraph 6. 
This register should facilitate a holistic understanding of the application 
and use of the models and provide the institution’s management body and 
senior management with a comprehensive overview of the models in 
place. 
(c) Guidelines on identifying and mitigating any areas where measurement 
uncertainty and model deficiencies are known to exist, according to their 
materiality. In particular, those elements that relate to qualitative aspects of 
model risk (such as data deficiencies, model misuse or implementation 





8 
Institutions are expected to implement an effective model risk management framework for all models in 
use. However, Section 1 focuses only on internal models approved for use for the calculation of own 
funds requirements for credit, market and counterparty credit risk and the respective requirements for a 
model risk management framework for these models. 


9 
“Model risk” as defined in Article 3(1) sub-paragraph (11) of CRD. 



errors) should be considered. This methodology should be applied 
consistently across the group (e.g. in subsidiaries or regions). 
(d) Guidelines and methodologies for the qualitative and/or quantitative 
assessment and measurement10 of the institution’s model risk. 
(e) Guidelines with respect to the model life cycle as set out in paragraph 2. 
(f) Procedures for model risk communication and reporting (internal and 
external). 
(g) Definition of roles and responsibilities within the model risk management 
framework (e.g. define which unit(s) is/are in charge of or involved in 
independent reviews of risk estimates). 


10 
Article 85(1) of CRD refers to model risk in operational risk. However, and specifically with regard to 
Pillar 1 models, the EBA Guidelines on SREP state that competent authorities should consider model 
risk as part of the assessment of specific risks to capital (e.g. IRB model deficiency is considered as 
part of the credit risk assessment) and for the capital adequacy assessment. In particular for IRB 
models, the expected range of estimation errors should be reflected in the margin of conservatism of 
the model, in accordance with Article 179(1)(f) of the CRR. The guidance for the calculation of the 
margin of conservatism for IRB models is defined in the credit risk chapter. 


1.5 Identification of management body and senior management 


10. Institutions should clearly define the roles and responsibilities of their 
management body and senior management as defined in Article 3(1) sub-
paragraphs (7) and (9) of CRD, as implemented in the relevant national law with 
regard to internal models and in relation to each risk type. The institution’s 
internal documentation should also clearly describe the composition of the 
management body and the senior management. 
11. The term “management body” could refer to the single board, in a one-tier 
system, or to the function of the management and supervisory boards in a two-
tier corporate governance system. The institution should document the roles 
and responsibilities of each individual in the management body. For the 
purposes of this guide, the management body refers to the members of the 
management body in its management function (executive members). 
12. The institution should assess the appropriateness of designated committees of 
the management body (if applicable) in order to ensure that they provide an 
adequate support function for effective decision-making procedures. This holds, 
in particular, for decisions concerning material aspects of the institution’s 
internal models. The institution should clearly document the composition, 
mandate and reporting lines of committees responsible for internal model 
governance and oversight, as well as the decisions taken. These committees 
should be given a mandate by the management body; the mandate should 
clearly define their tasks and authority. In order for the designated committee to 
be set at an appropriate level, it should be chaired by a member of the 
management body. 



13. The institution should also be able to identify which individuals constitute its 
senior management with respect to the credit, market and counterparty credit 
risk Pillar I model frameworks. In addition to the specifications of Article 3(1) 
sub-paragraphs (7) and (9) of CRD, senior management can be deemed to 
constitute the highest hierarchical level(s) below the management body with a 
clearly defined responsibility for internal models.11 The senior management 
should either report directly to the management body or be responsible for 
providing it with the necessary information to carry out its duties, especially with 
regard to its oversight role. The senior management’s decision-making 
procedures relating to all aspects of internal models should be clearly 
documented. 


11 
This includes clarity on the role, authority and responsibilities of the various positions within senior 
management. 


12 
The principles set out in paragraphs 15 to 18 do not apply to the organisational structures for the 
management of counterparty credit risk due to the specific requirements of Article 287(1) and (2) and 
Article 293(1)(c) of the CRR. Further guidance is given in Section 9 of the counterparty credit risk 
chapter. Under Article 287(2) of the CRR, the risk control unit must be responsible for, among other 
things, the design and implementation of the institution’s counterparty credit risk management system. 
Under Article 287(2)(d), this unit must also be independent from units responsible for originating, 
renewing or trading exposures and free from undue influence. 


1.6 General principles for internal validation 


14. All internal models and internal estimates should be subject to an initial, and 
subsequently to an annual, internal validation. For the avoidance of doubt, the 
term “initial validation” in the guide refers to the validation of new models as well 
as the validation of material changes and extensions to approved models. 
15. To ensure the effective independence of the internal validation function from the 
model development process (i.e. model design, development, implementation 
and monitoring), institutions should have appropriate organisational 
arrangements in place. The ECB understands that the possible organisational 
arrangements are as follows:12 
(a) separation into two different units reporting to different members of the 
senior management; 
(b) separation into two different units reporting to the same member of the 
senior management; 
(c) separate staff within the same unit. 





The decision on which organisational arrangement to adopt should take into 
account the nature, size and scale of the institution and the complexity of the 
risks inherent in its business model. 


16. Consequently, the ECB understands that large and complex institutions should 
implement the most robust independence option. 



17. With option (b) of paragraph 15, two different units report directly13 to the same 
member of senior management, but act separately at any level below that. 
When using this second option, the ECB considers that it is good practice if the 
institution fulfils the additional requirements specified in Article 10(3) of 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 and Article 22(1)(e) of the 
Final draft RTS on assessment methodology for IMA and significant share. The 
internal audit should regularly assess whether these additional requirements 
are being met. 
18. The ECB considers that option (c) of paragraph 15 could be suitable for small 
legal entities which are not classified as global systemically important 
institutions (G-SIIs) or other systemically important institutions (O-SIIs).14 When 
using this option, the ECB considers that it is good practice if the institution 
fulfils the additional requirements specified in Article 10(4) of Commission 
Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 and Article 22(2) of the Final draft RTS 
on assessment methodology for IMA and significant share, and in particular that 
the internal audit regularly assesses that these additional requirements are met. 
19. A proper separation of the staff of the development function from the staff of the 
validation function enables institutions to limit the risk of conflicts of interest 
resulting in an ineffective challenge from the validation. To mitigate this risk, the 
institution should ensure that the staff of the validation function is separate from 
the staff involved in the model development process.15 
20. The validation function16 should be adequately staffed following the 
proportionality principle. It should have suitable resources and experienced,17 
qualified personnel (who have appropriate quantitative and qualitative 
knowledge) to enable it to conduct an effective independent challenge of the 
internal models and internal estimates and their performance. 


13 
Crossing the units’ reporting lines on a lower level would impede fulfilling the requirement. 


14 
SIs not considered as O-SIIs are those not included in the list available on the EBA banking website. 


15 
In particular regarding option (c) of paragraph 15, this means different sub-teams with different tasks. 


16 
Regardless of whether the related validation tasks are allocated internally or delegated to a third party. 


17 
The use of external resources has to comply with the institution’s internal validation guidelines. See 
also Section 8.3.1 of this chapter. 


18 
See also Articles 191, 288 and 368(h) of the CRR. 


19 
See Section 22 “Internal audit function” of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance. 


1.7 General principles for internal audit 


21. The CRR requires internal models to be subject to regular review by the internal 
audit or another comparable independent auditing unit (hereinafter internal 
audit).18 In the understanding of the ECB, also taking into account the EBA 
Guidelines on internal governance19, this regular review needs to be efficient 
and effective to meet that objective. 



22. To enable an objective assessment, the internal audit should be granted an 
adequate level of independence from the processes and units reviewed to 
ensure that: 
(a) there is an effective separation of the internal audit from the staff involved 
in the operations of the internal models, e.g. the validation function, the 
risk control unit and all other relevant business areas; 
(b) it reports directly to the management body20; 
(c) no undue influence is exerted on the staff responsible for the audit 
conclusions. 



23. To enable a sufficient number and adequate scope of internal model reviews 
the internal audit should: 
(a) have adequate resources21 and experienced, qualified personnel (with the 
appropriate quantitative and qualitative knowledge) to undertake all 
relevant activities; 
(b) be adequately equipped and managed in proportion to the nature, size and 
degree of complexity of the institution’s business and organisational 
structure. 



24. In the follow-up process to the internal audit conclusions and findings and to 
ensure that the internal audit reviews have a timely and effective impact, the 
following are considered to be good practice. 
(a) Conclusions, findings and recommendations should be reported to the 
audit committee22 and/or the appropriate23 management level of the 
audited areas. 
(b) Where weaknesses are identified, action plans and related measures 
should be approved by the audit committee and/or the appropriate24 
management level of the audited areas. The internal audit function should 
monitor whether the audited areas implement the corrective measures in a 
timely manner. The institution should use appropriate information 
technology (IT) tools in order to ensure the effectiveness of the monitoring 
procedures. 
(c) Regular (at least annual) status reports should be prepared and the results 
discussed in the appropriate committees to ensure the timely and proper 
implementation of follow-up actions. Institutions should submit a summary 





20 
Definition provided in paragraph 11. 


21 
The use of external resources should comply with the institution’s internal audit guidelines. See also 
Section 8.3.1 of this chapter. 


22 
As defined in Article 76(3), sub-paragraph 4, of CRD. 


23 
The appropriate level of management (the management body or senior management) depends on the 
corporate governance model and the severity of the results. 



of the outcomes of the relevant audit reports, action plans and the status 
of findings to the competent authority. 


1.8 General principles on climate-related and environmental risks 


25. Institutions should assess the materiality of all risks in the life cycle of their 
internal models as set out in paragraph 2 of this chapter, including climate-
related and environmental risks24. Where climate-related and environmental 
risks drivers are found to be relevant and material, institutions should include 
such risk drivers in their internal models approved for use for the calculation of 
own funds requirements for credit and market risk. 


24 
This principle is defined in the context of the Guide on climate-related and environmental risks. 


25 
If the ECB decision on the material change or extension includes a condition suspending the effect of 
(parts of) the decision, the date of the notification (for the part of the decision subject to the condition) 
should generally be understood to be the date when the ECB further notifies the institution about the 
removal of the condition. 


26 
Unless specified differently in the ECB decision, ancillary provisions such as limitations are applicable 
as of the implementation date, while obligation deadlines are counted from the date of the notification. 


27 
Institutions with internal models approved for the calculation of own funds requirements for credit risk 
should still fulfil the principles on the re-rating process set out in Section 7.6 of this chapter. In 
particular, the re-rating process for the purpose of calculating own funds requirements is expected to 
start at the implementation date. 


1.9 General principles for the implementation of a changed or 
extended model 


26. Under Article 3(5) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014, 
institutions must calculate the own funds requirements based on the approved 
material change or extension from the date specified in the new permission (the 
“implementation date”) which must replace the prior one. In general, it is 
expected that institutions will be capable of implementing the material change 
or extension in a timely manner upon receiving permission and in any case 
without undue delay. Therefore, when setting the implementation date, the ECB 
considers that the implementation should happen within a reasonable time 
frame starting from the date of the notification of the permission.25 26 The ECB 
generally expects this time frame to be no longer than three months from the 
date of the notification. Exceptions to this expectation should be requested by 
the institution in question, which should provide reasons for the request, and 
can only be granted under specific circumstances (for instance in the case of 
implementation requiring a staggered approach or joint implementation, or in 
the case of technical constraints inherent to the IT framework).27 Note that the 
above guidance on the implementation date is given without prejudice to the 
expectations set out in Section 2.2.2 of the credit risk chapter of this guide. 



2 Roll-out and permanent partial use 


2.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 2 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

1, 6, 7, 8 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

148, 149, 150, 189 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/201428 

12/03/2014 

 

 

SSM Regulation29 

15/10/2013 

10 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

EBA Consultation Paper 2014/1030 

26/06/2014 

Entire paper and responses received and 
published were considered 



28 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 of 12 March 2014 supplementing Regulation 
(EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical 
standards for assessing the materiality of extensions and changes of the Internal Ratings Based 
Approach and the Advanced Measurement Approach (OJ L 148, 20.5.2014, p.36), referred to in this 
guide as “Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014”. 


29 
Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European 
Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions (OJ L 287, 
29.10.2013, p. 63), referred to in this guide as the “SSM Regulation”. 


30 
Consultation Paper “Draft regulatory technical standards on the sequential implementation of the IRB 
Approach and permanent partial use under the Standardised Approach under Articles 148(6), 150(3) 
and 152(5) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR)” (EBA/CP/2014/10), referred to in this guide as 
“EBA Consultation Paper 2014/10”. 


 


2.2 Application of the IRB approach 


27. In accordance with Article 148 of the CRR, institutions must implement the 
internal ratings-based (IRB) approach for all exposures, unless they have 
received the permission of the competent authority to permanently use the 
standardised approach (SA) on some exposure classes or some types of 
exposures. 
28. The criteria used to define the scope of application and sequential 
implementation of the IRB approach should be clearly documented and agreed 
with the competent authority. The ECB understands that these criteria include 
the following. 
(a) Quantitative aspects: as a minimum, the materiality and risk profile of the 
exposures and internal thresholds/ratios (for both exposure at default 
(EAD) value and risk-weighted exposure amounts (RWEAs)) for the initial 
and targeted IRB coverage. For institutions for which the ECB is the 
competent authority of the consolidated entity, the initial IRB coverage ratio 
(rating systems included in the initial IRB application) is expected to be 






above 50% (in terms of both EAD and RWEAs31) at consolidated level. 
This takes into account that institutions must implement the IRB approach 
for all exposures included in the roll-out plan in a reasonable time period.32 
(b) Qualitative aspects: importance of the exposure classes or types of 
exposures for the institution’s business model, data availability, operational 
capacity, staffing, length of experience and homogeneity of treatment of 
similar exposures. 





29. Institutions which have already received permission to use the IRB approach 
are also expected to reach a 50% minimum IRB coverage ratio (in terms of both 
EAD and RWEAs) in the implementation of the approved roll-out plan. 
30. The IRB approach can be implemented sequentially across the different 
exposure classes or types of exposures, across different business units or for 
the use of own estimates of losses given default (LGDs) and conversion factors 
(CCFs) (roll-out). The ECB considers that the time frame for the initially 
approved roll-out plan should generally not exceed five years.33 
31. In the light of the ECB’s need to know the regulatory treatment of all exposures 
for its ongoing supervision, institutions are expected to provide the competent 
authority with full transparency and regular communications regarding this 
treatment.34 These communications should include information on all 
subsidiaries and all portfolios (together with clear exposure assignment criteria). 
Institutions should receive explicit permission from the competent authority to 
use the SA for exposure classes or types of exposures that are not in the scope 
of the IRB approach, following the requirements established under Article 150 of 
the CRR. 
32. Decisions of the institutions on the application and sequential implementation of 
the IRB approach should be triggered by internal criteria (as defined in 
paragraph 28) with the main purpose of enhancing risk management and risk 
sensitivity. In particular, sequential implementation should not be selectively 
used for the purpose of achieving reduced own funds requirements.35 
33. If, as the result of a merger or other type of transaction, an entity becomes a 
parent entity or entity that intends to apply the IRB, the IRB coverage ratio of 


31 
The EAD and RWEAs should be calculated by the institution in accordance with the regulatory 
approach envisaged for the calculation of own funds requirements in the initial approval request. 


32 
For the computation of the IRB ratio, institutions should exclude the following exposures: 


• equity exposures as referred to in Articles 133(1) and 147(6) of the CRR; 
• exposures covered under Article 150(1) paragraphs (d), (e), (f), (i) and (j) of the CRR; 
• exposures classified as “other non-credit obligation assets” and “items representing securitisation 
positions” under Article 147(2) paragraphs (f) and (g) of the CRR; 
• exposures classified as “other items” under Article 112(q) of the CRR. 


The rationale for these exclusions is to limit the scope to exposures for which the CRR envisages the 
implementation of a rating system. 


33 
See Article 148(2) of the CRR. 


34 
Under Article 10 of the SSM Regulation, the ECB can request all relevant information. 


35 
See Article 148(3) of the CRR. 



the post-merger legal entity should meet the expectations set out in paragraph 
28(a) of this chapter. 


2.3 Governance of the roll-out plan for the IRB approach 


34. “All material aspects of the rating and estimation processes shall be approved 
by the institution’s management body or a designated committee thereof and 
senior management.”36 As the roll-out plan determines the intended application 
of the IRB approach and its sequential implementation, it too should be 
approved by the institution's senior management and management body (or a 
designated committee thereof). 
35. As a corollary and in accordance with Article 189(2)(a) of the CRR, the ECB 
understands that the reporting by senior management on the status and 
progress of the sequential implementation of the IRB approach should be a 
regular agenda item for the management body or designated committee. The 
ECB would consider the following to be good practice: that the status of the roll-
out plan is reported frequently (at least annually) and that such reports include 
the exact scope of application (exposure class), the planned dates of approval 
and/or use, and the “initial, current and planned”37 exposure amounts and 
RWEAs. 
36. To ensure compliance with Article 189(1) of the CRR with respect to the roll-out 
plan, institutions should have a framework or policy for the governance of their 
roll-out plan that includes, as mentioned above, the following: 
(a) indication of which internal bodies, including the management body or 
other committees and persons, are responsible for approving the roll-out 
plan and any changes to it; 
(b) the frequency of reporting on the implementation of the roll-out plan to the 
management body (or designated committee) and to the competent 
authority; 
(c) the criteria used for introducing changes to the roll-out plan (see also 
Section 2.4, below); 
(d) controls to assess compliance with the roll-out plan, for example second 
line of defence attestation or internal audit review (see also paragraph 91). 





36 
See Article 189(1) of the CRR. 


37 
Where “initial” refers to the initial application, “current” to the moment the roll-out plan is updated and 
“planned” to the target level. 


2.4 Changes to the roll-out plan for the IRB approach 


37. Under Article 148(2) of the CRR, institutions are required to follow the roll-out 
plan approved by the competent authorities. In the event that a change in the 



approved roll-out plan is necessary, this change needs to be subject to a 
supervisory decision. 
38. Article 7(3) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/43938 sets out 
the conditions under which competent authorities may approve any changes to 
the sequence and time period of the plan. The ECB intends to assess any 
application for a change to a roll-out plan against these conditions, on the basis 
of the documentation provided by the institution regarding the rationale for the 
change, the materiality of the portfolios affected, and governance arrangements 
for the change (e.g. which body will approve it). In addition, when assessing an 
application for a change to the roll-out plan, the competent authority will 
determine, if necessary, whether the proposed amendment to the time frame for 
the implementation of the roll-out plan is acceptable. If institutions have already 
completed the implementation of their roll-out plan but would like to extend the 
use of the IRB approach (for instance following a merger or acquisition), they 
should also seek approval39 from the competent authority. 
39. Furthermore, institutions should pay attention to the following. 
(a) Resource constraints and re-prioritisation may affect their operational 
capability to develop and maintain rating systems. Institutions should seek 
to minimise disruptions to the implementation of the roll-out plan as a 
result of such factors, taking appropriate mitigation or contingency actions 
to demonstrate compliance with the CRR requirements. 
(b) General uncertainty caused by potential changes to the IRB regulatory 
requirements should not be considered a valid reason for changing the 
roll-out plan (or for delaying its implementation). If such regulatory 
changes take place and become binding, the institution can then reflect 
the impact on its plan by submitting a revised roll-out plan for approval. 





38 
“When assessing the institution’s compliance with the plan for sequential implementation of the IRB 
Approach, which has been subject to permission of the competent authorities in accordance with Article 
148 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, competent authorities may consider changes to the sequence 
and time period appropriate only if one or more of the following conditions are met: 


a) there are significant changes in the business environment and in particular changes in strategy, 
mergers and acquisitions; 
b) there are significant changes in the relevant regulatory requirements; 
c) material weaknesses in rating systems have been identified by the competent authority, or by the 
internal audit or the validation function; 
d) the elements referred to in paragraph 2 have changed significantly, or any of the elements 
referred to in paragraph 2 were not taken into account adequately in the plan for sequential 
implementation of the IRB Approach which was approved.” 


39 
In line with the requirements of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 for model 
changes and extensions in the scope of that regulation. 


40 
See also Article 8(3) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439. 


2.5 Monitoring of compliance with permanent partial use provisions 


40. Since permanent partial use (PPU) requires compliance with certain conditions, 
institutions need to ensure on an ongoing basis that exposures under PPU fall 
within the categories listed in Article 150(1) of the CRR.40 To avoid a risk of 



non-compliance with these requirements, the ECB is of the view that institutions 
should implement the following. 
(a) Measures and triggers for a re-assessment of the suitability for PPU of 
PPU-authorised exposure classes or types of exposures. Examples of 
measures that could be used include the number of obligors, EAD, 
proportion of group EAD, and average risk weight. 
(b) A reporting process monitoring the materiality (in terms of both EAD and 
RWEAs) of the exposure classes or types of exposures in PPU over time. 
The PPU reporting should identify any changes in PPU exposures and 
RWEAs over time as well as the exposure classes or types of exposures 
that are at risk of no longer fulfilling the PPU conditions. 
(c) Processes and guidelines to assess whether further exposure classes or 
types of exposure – currently treated under the IRB approach – may 
become eligible for PPU (e.g. business in run-off or planned to be 
discontinued, excessive maintenance costs induced by the regulatory 
requirements vis-à-vis number of obligors). 





2.6 Reversion to a less sophisticated approach 


41. Institutions that use the IRB approach for a particular exposure class or type of 
exposure may be permitted to stop using that approach and use the SA for the 
calculation of RWEAs instead if the conditions described in Article 149(1) and 
(3) of the CRR are met.41 Similarly, institutions which have obtained permission 
to use own estimates of LGDs and conversion factors under Article 151(9) of 
the CRR may be permitted to revert to the use of LGD values and conversion 
factors referred to in Article 151(8) (the foundation-IRB (F-IRB) approach) if the 
conditions described in Article 149(2) and (3) of the CRR are met. 
42. In order to fulfil the requirements of Article 149 of the CRR, institutions should, 
among other things42, document the rationale for reverting to a less 
sophisticated approach (the SA or the F-IRB approach). This means that an 
institution should document any reasons or impediments that arose after the 
original authorisation and led the institution to reconsider the use of an 
advanced approach. Depending on the features of the exposure class and/or 
type of exposure affected, institutions should in particular define and formalise 
objective and intuitive criteria for deciding which of the different approaches 
should be used for the calculation of own funds requirements across the whole 
portfolio. In doing so, they should take the following into account as part of a 
group-wide internal models strategy: 


41 
In such cases, the conditions for PPU set out in Article 150 of the CRR, as well as the conditions set out 
in Article 148, must also be fulfilled. 


42 
Other relevant conditions for reverting to the use of a less sophisticated approach are (i) that the 
institution has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the competent authority that the use of the SA would 
not have a material adverse impact on the solvency of the institution or its ability to manage risk 
effectively, and (ii) that the institution has received the prior permission of the competent authority. 



(a) the required operational capability and cost for the institution to maintain a 
rating system for the respective exposure class and/or type of exposure in 
relation to the size of the institution and the strategic/non-strategic nature 
and scale of its activities; 
(b) the availability of minimum representative data for redeveloping a model or 
for developing another admissible approach (for example, in the case of 
reversion to the SA, institutions should first consider whether other 
admissible IRB approaches, such as the F-IRB or, where relevant, the 
approach under Article 153(5) of the CRR known as the supervisory 
slotting criteria approach (SSCA) could be developed without 
disproportionate effort); 
(c) where Article 149(1) of the CRR applies, the possibility of using another 
available IRB approach (such as the simple risk weight method for equity 
exposures); 
(d) the impact43 of the reversion on own funds requirements by comparing: 
(i) the capital requirements produced by the approach currently used, 
including the effects of potential supervisory measures (such as 
limitations); 
(ii) the capital requirements produced by the use of the less 
sophisticated approach requested (the SA or the F-IRB approach). 





43 
Including effects stemming from both risk-weighted assets and, where relevant, expected loss 
components. 


Where the reversion leads to a non-negligible reduction of capital requirements, 
institutions should provide convincing evidence that there is no intention to 
reduce own funds requirements. 


43. Institutions should consistently apply across exposure classes and/or exposure 
types with similar features in terms of modelling (in particular with regard to 
points (a) and (b) of paragraph 42 above) the criteria defined to assess whether 
the requirements set out in Article 149(1) and (2) of the CRR have been met. 
Where a request is made to revert to a different approach (the SA or the F-IRB 
approach) for similar exposures of this kind, institutions are also expected to 
provide convincing evidence that the request is not being made in order to 
reduce own funds requirements. For instance, providing information on the own 
funds requirements (or a proxy of these requirements) produced by using 
another admissible approach for the related exposures may help to inform the 
assessment as to whether the request is being made in order to reduce own 
funds requirements. 
44. Where institutions envisage several applications linked to a new internal model 
strategy, the ECB expects that submitting a single comprehensive and 
consistent request for all the rating systems in line with the strategy will usually 
ensure a more efficient assessment and approval process. 



45. More specifically, in the case of requests to revert to the SA for specialised 
lending exposures: 
(a) regarding the “necessity” condition referred to in Article 149(1)(a) of the 
CRR, namely that the reversion is necessary on the basis of nature and 
complexity of the institution's total exposures of this type, the institution 
should demonstrate that the use of the SSCA is not feasible or 
proportionate given, for example, the immateriality of the affected 
exposures, and that it can no longer build a rating system that would 
provide a meaningful differentiation of risk; 
(b) regarding the condition referred to in Article 149(1)(a) of the CRR that the 
use of the SA is not proposed in order to reduce the institution’s own funds 
requirements, the impact on own funds requirements of using the SA 
should also be compared with the own funds requirements produced by 
using the SSCA (or a proxy of it), unless the institution has already 
provided sufficient convincing evidence that the use of this approach is not 
feasible. 





2.7 Internal models in the context of consolidations 


46. The principles listed in this section are applicable to Pillar 1 internal models for 
credit, market and counterparty credit risk. 
47. The general treatment of internal models in the case of consolidations, i.e. 
mergers and acquisitions, is set out in Section 3.4 of the ECB’s Guide on the 
supervisory approach to consolidation in the banking sector. Paragraph 36 of 
that document acknowledges that compliance issues regarding the continued 
use of internal models may arise in the event of a business combination. 
Paragraph 37 of the same document envisages the use of existing internal 
models in such cases “subject to a clear model mapping and a credible internal 
models roll-out plan to address the specific internal model issues created 
through the merger, as well as other conditions where appropriate”. 
48. In order to implement this guidance, a separate ECB decision is needed for 
each individual case, including details of compliance issues arising at the 
transaction date, the actions the institution will take to return to compliance44, 
and necessary transitional arrangements related to the RWEA calculation while 
the return to compliance plan (see next paragraph) is implemented. 
49. Institutions are expected to submit a “return to compliance plan” explaining how 
they will return to compliance with regard to all consolidation-related compliance 
issues. The return to compliance plan should clarify the strategy that the bank 
will follow to restore compliance and should include details of the following in 
particular: 


44 
In the context of IRB models, see Article 146 of the CRR. 



• the internal models landscape of the banks participating in the merger, the 
use of internal model approaches or of the SA, and the scope of the 
models; 
• the target internal model landscape of the post-merger legal entity; 
• the concrete actions, with their associated timelines, that the bank plans to 
take to achieve the target internal model landscape, in particular model 
extensions, requests for initial model approvals and PPU requests; 
• how the post-consolidation legal entity intends to calculate RWEAs until 
the return to full compliance, taking into account the capability of the 
acquiring bank to use the models of the target, in particular before and 
after any potential IT integration. 


3 Internal governance 


3.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 3 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

2, 14, 15, 16, 32 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

175, 179, 187, 189, 190 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 32845 

08/07/2015 

 

Principles 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 



45 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision “Guidelines: Corporate governance principles for banks”, 
referred to in this guide as “Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 328”. 


 


50. The principles on internal governance have been organised along the following 
lines: 
(a) the materiality of rating systems (Section 3.2); 
(b) the management body and senior management: 
(i) decision-making responsibilities (Section 3.3); 
(ii) management reporting (Section 3.4); 
(iii) understanding of the rating systems (Section 3.5); 



(c) responsibilities of the credit risk control unit (CRCU) (Section 3.6). 






3.2 Materiality of rating systems 


51. Whether a rating system is material depends on quantitative criteria (such as 
the share of total EAD and RWEA covered by the material rating systems) and 
qualitative criteria (such as the type, riskiness and strategic importance of the 
exposures, the complexity of the rating systems and risk parameters, and the 
model risk – in alignment with the model risk management framework). The 
more material a rating system is, the higher are the risks resulting from any 
potential shortcomings in it. Consequently, materiality should be an essential 
consideration in model risk management and the rating systems classified as 
material by the institution should be subject to particular scrutiny. 
52. In line with the above, institutions should assess and determine the materiality 
of their rating systems and communicate it to the competent authority. Material 
rating systems should at least include the rating systems covering material 
types of exposure. As the classification of the rating systems according to their 
materiality may be subject to changes resulting from internal or external factors 
(e.g. changes in economic factors, changes in business strategy), institutions 
should review their classification on a regular basis. 
53. Although the same requirements apply to all rating systems throughout the 
model life cycle, additional requirements may apply to material rating systems, 
in particular with regard to management reporting (see Section 3.4 of this 
chapter) and internal validation (see Section 4.3 of this chapter). This concept, 
that additional requirements may apply for material rating systems, is supported 
by the higher potential risk resulting from material rating systems and by Article 
189 of the CRR, which also embeds the concept of materiality.46 


46 
See Article 189(1) and (3) of the CRR. 


47 
If the decision-making process takes place in the same forum where management body and senior 
management members meet, institutions should ensure that the information is approved beforehand by 
senior management and that senior management is responsible for presenting it to the forum. 


3.3 Decision-making responsibilities 


54. In accordance with Article 189(1) of the CRR, material aspects of all rating and 
estimation processes must be approved by the institution's management body 
or a committee designated by it, as well as by senior management.47 The ECB 
considers that Article 14(b) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
2022/439 provides a good understanding of the aspects that should at least be 
considered as material, and should therefore be approved at both levels. 
55. The ECB understands that the approval process envisaged by Article 189(1) of 
the CRR should include the documentation of the approvals, so that they can 
be made available for review at the request of the institution’s internal audit or 
the competent authority. 
56. The institution should define which policies should be approved at both levels 
(management body and senior management) and this should be clarified in 



their respective mandates. At a minimum, the following should be considered as 
requiring approval at both levels: (i) risk management policies that could have a 
material impact on the institution’s rating systems and risk estimates, and (ii) 
policies covering the risk of a third-party provider for model-related tasks 
ceasing to operate (in relation to IT infrastructure and contingency planning).48 
57. Senior management must provide notice to the management body or a 
designated committee thereof of material changes or exceptions from 
established policies.49 Consequently, institutions should be able to demonstrate 
which material changes or exceptions from established policies are 
communicated to the management body or a committee designated by it, and 
how this is done. To ensure compliance with this provision each institution 
should, in the ECB’s view, have a policy in place which defines material 
changes or exceptions. They may use quantitative and/or qualitative criteria to 
do so. The use of expert judgement within the classification process should be 
clearly explained and documented. 


48 
This view of the ECB coincides with Article 14(b) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
2022/439. 


49 
See Article 189(2)(a) of the CRR. 


50 
See Article 189(2), sub-paragraph 2, and Article 189(3) of the CRR. 


51 
“In assessing the adequacy of the management reporting as referred to in Article 189 of Regulation 
(EU) No 575/2013, competent authorities shall verify that: 


(a) the management reporting includes information about all of the following: 
(i) the risk profile of the obligors or exposures, by grade; 
(ii) the migration across grades; 
(iii) an estimation of the relevant risk parameters per grade; 
(iv) a comparison of realised default rates, and, where own estimates are used, of realised LGDs 
and realised conversion factors against expectations; 


3.4 Management reporting 


58. To ensure consistent oversight of the functioning of the rating systems, the CRR 
requires management reporting on their performance.50 
59. To comply with this reporting requirement, institutions should determine the 
level of detail of the information and data to be presented to senior 
management and the management body (or designated committee thereof), 
and the frequency of the reporting. In view of proportionality, the level of detail 
of the information and data and the frequency of reporting may differ depending 
on the recipient and the materiality of the rating systems concerned (see 
Section 3.2 of this chapter on the materiality of rating systems). Reports 
regarding non-material rating systems may be provided in a more aggregated 
form. The procedures encompassing reporting for non-material rating systems 
should be clearly defined in the institution’s policies and differences with respect 
to the reporting of material rating systems should be clearly identified. 
60. The ECB considers that Article 15 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 
No 2022/439 provides a good understanding of the elements to be included as 
part of the institution’s management reporting.51 In particular, these reports 



(v) stress test assumptions and results; 
(vi) the performance of the rating process, areas needing improvement and the status of efforts to 
improve previously identified deficiencies of the rating systems; 
(vii) validation reports; 
(b) the form and the frequency of management are adequate having regard to the significance and the 
type of the information and to the level the recipient occupies in the hierarchy, taking into account 
the institution’s organisational structure; 
(c) the management reporting facilitates the senior management’s monitoring of the credit risk in the 
overall portfolio of exposures covered by the IRB Approach; 
(d) the management reporting is proportionate to the nature, size, and degree of complexity of the 
institution´s business and organizational structure.” 


52 
See Article 189(1) and (2)(b) of the CRR. 


should include information regarding the materiality of each rating system, its 
perceived strengths and limitations, and its current status in the light of 
validation and/or audit actions. 
61. As regards the level of detail of content, reports to the management body are 
expected to be more concise than reports to senior management. They should, 
however, include the necessary information for sound and appropriate decision-
making. As regards frequency, institutions should provide reports to senior 
management as often as, or more frequently than, to the management body (or 
designated committee). Risk profiles and the comparison of estimated 
probability of default (PD) with realised default rates should be reported to 
senior management more frequently than annually (at least for material rating 
systems – see also paragraph 53) to enable senior management to ensure, on 
an ongoing basis, that the rating systems are operating properly in accordance 
with Article 189(2)(c) of the CRR and to avoid risks that could justify supervisory 
measures. 
62. At least annually, both senior management and the management body should 
receive an aggregated overview of the validation results for each rating system 
(see also paragraph 81). 


3.5 Understanding of the rating systems 


63. The management body must possess a general understanding of the rating 
systems and senior management must have a good understanding of the rating 
systems designs and operations.52 Institutions should therefore be able to 
provide evidence of the processes they use to improve and maintain the 
management body and senior management’s understanding of the rating 
systems, including those implemented after receiving permission to use the IRB 
approach. 
64. The format and content of these processes (for example workshops, seminars 
or dedicated training on IRB models) should match the roles and responsibilities 
of the management body and senior management, in particular those related to 
the model approval process. Especially for the management body, an adequate 
balance between collective and individual knowledge should be ensured. In the 



case of third-party involvement (see Section 8 of this chapter), the institution 
should maintain adequate internal knowledge of the outsourced tasks. 
65. While reporting or monitoring can be considered as part of the management 
body and senior management’s knowledge-building process, it is expected that 
these will not be the only means of ensuring that they have an adequate 
understanding of the rating systems. 
66. One outcome of an effective internal understanding of the rating system is that 
the management body or the designated committee should be able to hold an 
objective debate on, and challenge, the rating systems. This applies in 
particular to the approval of material changes or the escalation process 
contemplated in paragraph 83. In the ECB’s view, it is good practice if the 
evidence of such debates is visible in the minutes of management body or 
designated committee meetings in which such a challenge is raised, as the 
management body or the designated committee should be able to discuss the 
outcomes, use, strengths and limitations of the IRB models. 


3.6 The credit risk control unit (CRCU) 


67. To ensure that the CRCU is independent from the personnel and management 
functions responsible for originating and renewing exposures,53 institutions 
should clearly determine which individuals and/or teams make up the credit risk 
control function and which personnel and/or units are responsible for originating 
and renewing exposures,54 and why they are independent from one another. In 
addition, institutions need to ensure a direct line of reporting of the CRCU to 
senior management in accordance with Article 190(1) of the CRR. 
68. Institutions should have a clear written mandate for their CRCU which clarifies 
its roles and responsibilities in order to ensure that they are aligned to the 
responsibilities mentioned in Article 190(2) of the CRR. Institutions should also 
determine which units are responsible for performing which subset of the tasks 
allocated to the CRCU(s),55 especially those tasks related to model design and 
development and the ongoing monitoring of the rating systems. 
69. The CRCU is responsible for ensuring the satisfactory performance of the rating 
systems and their ongoing maintenance. The CRCU may provide the validation 
function, when required and in line with paragraph 77, with the necessary input 
for the validation of internal estimates. In addition, the CRCU should address 
any deficiencies identified by the validation function and conduct the approved 
remediation activities as described in paragraph 82. 


53 
See Article 190(1) of the CRR. 


54 
This refers in particular to those persons with authority or direct responsibility for decisions to originate 
or renew facility or obligor-level credit lines (for example by underwriting). 


55 
See Article 190(2) of the CRR. 



3.7 Review of estimates 


70. In accordance with Article 179(1)(c) of the CRR, risk estimates should be 
reviewed56 when new information comes to light but at least on an annual 
basis. The ECB considers it good practice to do this on the basis of: 
(a) the ongoing monitoring performed by the CRCU; 
(b) the annual validation of internal estimates performed by the validation 
function (as described in Section 4 of this chapter). 





56 
See the credit risk chapter. 


57 
Basel Committee Newsletter No. 4 (January 2005), “Update on work of the Accord Implementation 
Group related to validation under the Basel II Framework”, referred to in this guide as “Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) - Newsletter No. 4”. 


58 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision “Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme (RCAP) – 
Analysis of risk-weighted assets for credit risk in the banking book”, referred to in this guide as “Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) - Regulatory consistency assessment programme 
(RCAP)”. 


4 Internal validation 


4.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 4 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

10 

(1)(a), (b) and (c), 
(2)(a) 

11 

(1)(b), (2)(c), (4) 

12 

(a), (c), (d), (e) 

13 

(b) 

14 

(b), (d) 

15, 33, 36 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

144 

(1)(f) 

143, 170, 172, 
174, 185, 189 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 

Annex 1 Part 2 Section 1 and 2 

Other references 

 

 

 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) – Newsletter 
No. 457 

01/2005 

 

 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) Regulatory 
Consistency Assessment Programme (RCAP)58 

04/2016 

 

 



 


71. In the context of rating systems, the term “validation” encompasses a range of 
processes and activities that contribute to an assessment of whether ratings 
adequately differentiate risk, and whether estimates of risk parameters (such as 
PD, LGD and CCF) appropriately characterise the relevant aspects of risk. 



72. The main role of the validation function is to perform a consistent and 
meaningful assessment of the performance of internal rating and risk estimation 
systems. The term “validation function” encompasses the personnel responsible 
for performing the validation. 


4.2 Validation level and responsibilities 


73. In general, internal validation should be performed at all relevant levels. In 
particular, institutions should pay attention to the following. 
(a) If the institution has approval for a rating system on a consolidated basis 
only, the validation of that rating system should be performed at least at 
consolidated level. 
(b) If the institution has approval for a rating system on a consolidated basis 
as well as on a sub-consolidated and/or individual basis, the validation of 
that rating system should be performed at the consolidated as well as on 
the sub-consolidated and/or individual levels. The results of the validation 
at the sub-consolidated and/or individual levels should be taken into 
account for consistency reasons in the validation performed at 
consolidated level. 



74. In order to ensure consistency in validation activities across the different levels, 
the group validation function can provide support to validation functions at lower 
levels (sub-consolidated and/or individual level). However, responsibility for the 
validation tasks should be retained at the level at which the rating system is 
approved (sub-consolidated and/or individual level). See also Section 8.3.1 on 
internal and external outsourcing of internal validation and internal audit tasks 
and Section 8.3.5 on in-house knowledge of this chapter. 


4.3 Content and frequency of tasks of the validation function 


75. To meet the requirements of Article 185 of the CRR with regard to the 
assessment of the performance of the internal rating and risk estimates by the 
validation function, the ECB understands that institutions should implement the 
following. 
76. Validation policy 
Institutions should have internal validation policies involving proven procedures 
and methods which adequately validate the accuracy, robustness and stability 
of their estimation of all relevant risk parameters.59 The procedures and 
methods stipulated in the validation policy should be in line with the institution’s 
classification of material and non-material rating systems as defined in 


59 
Validation policies are assumed by Article 185(d) of the CRR, which stipulates that the methods and 
data used for quantitative validation must be documented and consistent through time. 



paragraphs 51 and 53. Institutions should follow their internal validation policy 
when carrying out validations. 
77. Validation process and content: 
(a) The validation process should assess the performance of the rating 
systems by means of qualitative and quantitative methods, in particular 
with regard to the ranking of borrowers by creditworthiness (ranking 
power) and risk parameter estimation (calibration appropriateness). 
(b) To be able to meaningfully and consistently assess the performance of the 
rating systems, the content of the validation process should be consistent 
across rating systems and through time.60 The analyses and tests 
described in this paragraph should be considered as the minimum 
activities required to ensure that the assessment is meaningful. However, 
the implementation of all of these analyses and tests does not necessarily 
mean that the validation requirements according to CRR have been 
fulfilled, nor should it prevent the institution from developing additional 
tests when deemed relevant. 
(c) The content of the validation process should include quantitative analyses, 
which in turn should include thresholds. If such thresholds are breached, 
further investigation should be initiated and, if necessary, adequate 
measures or actions should be triggered. 
(d) All analyses and tests should be performed in such a way that the 
validation function is in a position to propose an effective and independent 
challenge to model development and use. To that end, the institution 
should ensure that the validation function has its own access to the 
relevant databases.61 The results of the validation analyses and tests 
should be documented (validation report) and verifiable by third-party 
experts (e.g. the internal audit and the competent authority). This also 
includes the preparation of the validation data. 
(e) It is not expected that institutions develop a uniform validation process, as 
the relevant tests and their frequency may differ from one rating system to 
another (e.g. corporate vs. retail rating systems or material vs. non-
material rating systems). 
(f) To ensure that the systems in place to validate the accuracy and 
consistency of rating systems are sufficiently robust,62 institutions should 
ensure that any statistical tests or confidence intervals that they use are 





60 
See Article 185(a) of the CRR for “consistently and meaningfully” and Article 185(d) for “consistent 
through time”. 


61 
When an institution is using rating systems developed from pooled data, the validation function should 
have access to all relevant internal data of that institution. In addition, any third party involved may 
assist the institution in its validation activities by performing those validation tasks which require access 
to pooled data (see also paragraphs 143 and 146(d)). 


62 
See Article 185(a) of the CRR. 



appropriate from a methodological point of view and sufficiently 
conservative. 
(g) A meaningful validation of the rating systems requires (as also anticipated 
by Article 185(b) of the CRR with respect to certain elements) not only an 
initial validation but also assessment on a regular basis. In line with Article 
185(b) of the CRR, these assessments should be carried out annually.63 
Therefore, the validation analyses listed hereinafter should be carried out 
annually, unless otherwise advised below. As mentioned in paragraph 14 
the term “initial validation” in the guide refers to the validation of new 
models as well as the validation of material changes and extensions to 
approved models. In the case of material changes and extensions the 
validation should be conducted on those aspects directly or indirectly 
affected by the change.64 
(h) In addition, and to ensure a robust validation, the analyses should be 
performed by the validation function without considering input from the 
CRCU65 unless otherwise specified below. 
(i) Back-testing66 





63 
See Article 174(d) of the CRR. 


64 
See also Article 11(4) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439. 


65 
Or credit risk control function for institutions using option (c) of paragraph 15. 


66 
Comparison of risk estimates with realised default rates, in accordance with Article 185(b) of the CRR. 


67 
Further elaborated in Article 170(1), sub-paragraphs (d), (e) and (f), and 170(3)(c) of the CRR. 


(ii) Discriminatory power 


For the annual validation of non-material rating systems, the 
validation function can also take into account the back-testing 
analyses performed by the CRCU. 


(ii.a) Analyses of discriminatory power for PD models should be 
designed to ensure that the ranking of obligors/facilities 
resulting from the rating methodology appropriately separates 
riskier and less risky obligors/facilities.67 Similarly, analyses of 
discriminatory power for LGD (respective CCF) models should 
be designed to ensure that the LGD (respective CCF) model is 
able to discriminate between facilities with high values of LGD 
(respective CCF) and those with low values of LGD (respective 
CCF). 
(ii.b) These analyses should be performed at least at the level of the 
overall model and, when relevant, at the level of individual risk 
factors and other possible segments including, for example, 
scorecards and modules. 



(ii.c) For the annual validation of non-material rating systems, the 
validation function can also take into account the analyses of 
discriminatory power performed by the CRCU. 
(iii) Analyses of representativeness 
• Ensuring that the range of application of the model is in 
line with the approved one, in accordance with Article 
143(3) of the CRR. Obligor characteristics should be 
compared for PD models, and facility types and 
characteristics should be compared for LGD and CCF 
models. 
• Monitoring the changes made to the definition of default, 
with the aim of identifying any changes that would affect 
the representativeness of the dataset with respect to the 
obligors or facilities within the range of application of the 
model. 
• Analysing lending standards or workout procedures, 
external market and economic conditions, and other 
relevant characteristics surrounding the model 
development process. 
(iv) Analyses of overrides 








(iii.a) The data used to build the model must be representative of the 
actual obligors or exposures (Article 174(c) of the CRR). This 
should include the following checks. 

(iii.b) Where an institution uses data that are pooled across 
institutions, the analyses should also cover the requirements of 
Article 179(2) paragraphs (a) and (b) of the CRR. 

(iii.c) For the annual validation of rating systems, the validation 
function can also take into account the analyses of 
representativeness performed by the CRCU. 

(iv.a) Overrides should not only be monitored but also assessed as 
part of the validation process (Article 172(3) of the CRR). See 
also Section 6.6.2 of this chapter. 

(iv.b) Analyses of overrides should be conducted on an annual basis 
(and not at initial validation). The validation function can also 
take into account the analyses of overrides performed by the 
CRCU. 


(v) Stability analyses of the internal ratings and risk parameters over 
time68 








68 
This is required by Article 174(d) of the CRR. 


69 
This is required by Article 174(d) of the CRR on “monitoring of model performance and stability” and 
“review of model specifications”. 


70 
The term “homogeneity” is used here as defined in Article 36 of Commission Delegated Regulation 
(EU) No 2022/439. 


71 
See Article 174(b) of the CRR. 


• obligor/facility migrations; 
• stability of the migration matrix; 
• concentration in rating grades. 
(vi) Analyses of model design stability69 
• the differences between the original weights of the risk 
drivers (derived from the development sample) and the 
weights estimated from a different sample (longer or more 
recent historical sample); 
• the continued homogeneity70 of rating grades or pools 
used as a basis for the estimation of risk parameters. 



(vii) Evaluation of input data71 
• that the data treatment process is reliable and well-
founded; 








(v.a) Examples for analysing the stability of internal ratings and risk 
parameters over a specific observation period for PD 
estimates can be the following: 

(v.b) Institutions should justify excessive or unexpected variability. 

(v.c) For the annual validation of non-material rating systems, the 
validation function can also take into account the stability 
analyses performed by the CRCU. 

(vi.a) The institution should analyse: 

(vi.b) Institutions should justify excessive or unexpected variability. 

(vi.c) These analyses should be performed at initial validation and at 
an adequate frequency thereafter, but at least every three 
years. The validation function can also take into account the 
analyses performed by the CRCU for non-material rating 
systems, except at initial validation. 

(vii.a) This should ensure all of the following: 


• that the necessary information is available and up to date 
for the majority of the application portfolio’s72 obligors and 
facilities by tracking the age of model input data, 
especially in the case of financial statements; 
• that all defaults that occurred in the institution within the 
scope of application of the model are correctly identified 
and fully documented and registered in the appropriate 
and intended IT systems; 
• that the number and reasons for technical past-due 
situations are tracked. 











72 
“Application portfolio” means the actual portfolio of exposures within the range of application of the PD 
or LGD model at the time of estimation of a risk parameter. 


73 
The rationale for these analyses is set out in Article 174(c) of the CRR. 


(viii) Benchmarking analyses 
(ix) Data cleansing analyses73 
(x) Review of the model specification 








(vii.b) For the annual validation of the rating systems, the validation 
function can also take into account the evaluation of the input 
data performed by the CRCU. 

(viii.a) The institution should carry out comparisons with up-to-date 
data from representative and comparable external data 
sources, in particular with regard to low-default portfolios 
(Article 185(c) of the CRR). The institution should provide 
sufficient evidence in the event that no usable external data 
are available. 

(viii.b) Benchmarking analyses should be performed at initial 
validation and at an adequate frequency thereafter, but at least 
every three years. For benchmarking analyses at initial 
validation the validation function can take into account the 
benchmarking analyses performed by the CRCU. 

(ix.a) These analyses refer to the exclusion of observations (and the 
reasons behind this) from the risk database for the 
construction of the reference dataset (RDS) for the modelling. 

(ix.b) These analyses should be performed at least at initial 
validation. 

(x.a) This analysis should include challenging the model design, 
assumptions and methodology, based on the applicable 
regulation. A stepwise initial validation process involving 
interaction with the model development at each step of the 


(xi) Quality assurance of the computer codes used 
• that the implementation of the rating system in the 
relevant IT system is compliant with and reproduces 
exactly the documented model under review;74 
• that the descriptions of the data sources, variables and 
risk drivers used for development purposes are properly 
documented. 











development phase may not be sufficient to perform this 
challenge effectively. Regardless of the validation approach 
followed, the validation unit should provide an overall 
conclusion on the model to ensure that individual model 
strengths and weaknesses are evaluated on an overall basis. 

(x.b) This analysis should be performed at least at initial validation. 

(xi.a) This should include at least the following: 

74 
See also Article 144(1) of the CRR, which requires that the institution’s systems for the management 
and rating of credit risk exposures be sound and implemented with integrity. 


75 
This is contemplated in Article 174(e) of the CRR. 


(xii) Additional qualitative analyses75 
• qualitative assessments of assumptions and expert-
based estimates and of the integrity of the rating 
assignment process; 
• assessment of the use of the models and their correct 
application in practice; 
• assessment of legal or macroeconomic changes that may 
impact the risk parameters; 
• assessment of downturn phases and the correct 
application of margins of conservatism. 





(xi.b) These analyses should be performed at least at initial 
validation. 

(xii.a) These analyses should include, among other things, the 
following: 

(xii.b) Not all of the above-mentioned qualitative analyses need to be 
performed annually, but institutions should have a clear policy 
in place defining the appropriate frequency of each 
assessment. 

78. The duration from the start (reference date of data) to the end (approval of the 
validation results) of the yearly validation should not be more than one year. 



Deviations from this requirement should be clearly justified and documented by 
the institution and also reported to senior management. 
79. Quantitative thresholds (see paragraph 77(c)) should be set up for at least the 
following tests: 
(a) back-testing; 
(b) discriminatory power; 
(c) analyses of overrides; 
(d) stability analyses of the internal ratings and risk parameters over time. 



80. In particular for tests where no thresholds are applied, a consistent qualitative 
assessment of the results should be performed and documented. In the event 
of a negative qualitative assessment, adequate measures or actions should be 
triggered. 


4.4 Reporting and follow-up 


81. Institutions should ensure that senior management and the management body 
(or the committee designated by it) are informed about the conclusions and 
recommendations of the validation results as set out in the rating systems’ 
validation reports, and in particular about any exceeded thresholds and 
deficiencies identified, as this is required by Article 189(2)2 of the CRR. Such 
information should be provided, where appropriate,76 in a summary document 
(or documents) to ensure that a sufficient level of information is provided to 
senior management and to the management body and to enable them to 
assess the performance of the rating systems. This summary document (or 
documents) should present an aggregated view and comparison of the results 
for all the rating systems. 
82. Institutions should be able to demonstrate that, on the basis of the validation 
results and recommendations, measures are initiated to remedy the identified 
deficiencies of the rating systems (e.g. model change, recalibration) as 
contemplated by Article 189(2), sub-paragraph 2, of the CRR. 
83. Article 189(2)(c) of the CRR requires senior management to ensure, on an 
ongoing basis, that the rating systems are operating properly. Article 189(2)2 
requires senior management to be informed of the status of the measures to 
remedy any previously identified deficiencies. From this, it can be inferred that 
institutions should have a process in place (e.g. through a committee or another 
comparable body) to decide on such measures, who will be responsible for 
them, and the timelines for their implementation, on the basis of the validation 
results and recommendations. To ensure sufficient senior management 


76 
Such a summary document (or documents) is (are) expected to be appropriate, for example in the case 
of institutions with a significant number of rating systems. 



engagement as contemplated by Article 189(2) of the CRR, the ECB is of the 
view that at least for material rating systems the direct involvement of senior 
management should be envisaged (e.g. by senior management chairing the 
committee). The process should involve persons with the appropriate level of 
seniority and responsibility from both the CRCU and the validation function. If 
affected, business units should also be involved. An escalation process up to 
management body level should be in place in the event of conflicts between the 
validation function, the CRCU and/or business units. 
84. Institutions should have adequate processes in place for tracking the status of 
the measures adopted to remedy deficiencies.77 
85. Institutions should always apply to/notify the competent authority in the event of 
changes to their validation methodology and/or processes in accordance with 
Annex 1 Part 2 Section 1 (material model change) or Section 2 (ex ante 
notification) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014. 


77 
See Article 189(2), sub-paragraph 2, of the CRR. 


5 Internal audit 


5.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 5 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

17 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

145, 175, 191 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 

 

8 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 328 

08/07/2015 

43, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143 

 

EBA Guidelines on internal governance 

26/09/2017 

V. 22. 201, 202, 204, 205, 
206, 207 

 



 


5.2 Scope and frequency of the review of the rating systems 


86. In accordance with the existing regulatory requirements under Article 191 of the 
CRR, the internal audit or another comparable independent auditing unit 
(hereinafter internal audit) must review the institution's rating systems and its 
operations at least annually. The areas for review must include adherence to all 
applicable requirements. 
87. The ECB considers that an institution fulfils the above-mentioned requirements 
of Article 191 of the CRR if the internal audit carries out, annually and on the 



basis of up-to-date information, a general risk assessment of all aspects of the 
rating systems for the purpose of drawing up the appropriate internal audit work 
plan, as elaborated in paragraphs 88 to 90, and executes this plan. 
88. Depending on the outcome of the general risk assessment, the intensity and 
frequency of the audit assignments78 may differ between specific areas. 
(a) An area showing signs of increased/high risk in the general risk 
assessment is subject to a thorough audit assignment (“deep dive”). 
Reasons for the increased risk might include, but are not limited to, new 
processes, new regulatory requirements, new types of exposures in the 
range of application of a rating system, material model changes, findings 
by the competent authority or by any other function, open issues and 
areas with high risk identified in previous risk assessments. The audit 
assignments should be included in the annual audit work plan established 
on the basis of the general risk assessment. 
(b) Areas not showing any sign of an increased/high risk are subject to a deep 
dive mission at least every three years in order to provide a thorough 
update of the internal audit opinion on them.79 



89. For the purpose of the general risk assessment, the internal audit should 
develop its own opinion on the areas of rating systems to be reviewed but can 
take into consideration the analysis performed by the internal validation function 
where appropriate. This general risk assessment should include at least the 
opinion of the internal audit unit on the following aspects. 
(a) The development80 and performance81 of the rating systems. 
(b) The use of the models. The assessment of model use shows that the 
rating systems play an essential role in the most significant areas of the 
institution’s risk management, decision-making, credit approval, internal 
capital allocation and corporate governance functions. 
(c) The process for the materiality classification,82 the impact assessment and 
the compliance with regulatory requirements of all changes to the rating 
systems as well as their consequent implementation. The internal audit is 
informed of all changes to the rating systems. 
(d) The quality of the data used for the quantification of risk parameters. 
(e) The integrity of the rating assignment process. 





78 
An audit assignment can refer to a separate audit, a range of audits or themes of audits. 


79 
These deep dives may be either thematic, covering one area for several rating systems (e.g. rating 
assignment process, data quality management, definition of default), or targeted on a specific rating 
system. 


80 
The scope should include the initial validation tasks described in the internal validation principles. 


81 
The scope should include the annual/regular basic tasks described in the internal validation principles. 


82 
The internal audit function may be involved in the classification as an independent function confirming 
the assessment of materiality, as set out in Section 7.4 of this chapter. 



(f) The validation function, in particular with regard to its independence from 
the CRCU as described in paragraphs 17 and 18 of this chapter, as well as 
the scope and suitability of the tasks performed and outputs obtained. 
(g) The process for calculating own funds requirements. 


90. The procedures and results of the general risk assessment and prioritisation, 
the annual work plan, the guidelines, and the subsequent production of the 
internal audit reports should be properly documented and approved by the 
management body. The auditing techniques used and applied by the institution 
should be documented to ensure that assessments are consistent.83 
91. To avoid delays in the procedures related to an initial IRB application or an 
application to extend the IRB approach to an exposure class or a type of 
exposure that is currently treated using the SA, it is beneficial if the internal 
audit provides the competent authority with an independent assessment of the 
compliance of the initial IRB application or extension package with all applicable 
requirements. This applies in particular to compliance with the experience test 
requirements of Article 145 of the CRR. The benefit of carrying out an internal 
review of this nature is that shortcomings can be addressed by the institution 
before submitting the application, and the completeness of the initial IRB 
application or extension package can be ensured. 
92. For extensions and changes to the IRB approach,84 institutions must submit, 
among other things, and together with the application, reports of their 
independent review or validation.85 In the case of material changes in the 
validation methodology and/or validation processes or process-related aspects 
of changes in the definition of default, the review of those aspects should be 
independently assessed by the internal audit function. 


83 
See Article 175(1) and (2) of the CRR. 


84 
See Section 7.3 “Notification” of this chapter on suggested templates to be used. 


85 
Article 8(1)(e) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014. 



6 Model use 


6.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 6 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

18, 19, 20, 21 

 

22 

(1)(a) and (b) 

23 

(1)(a) 

24 

2(a), (b), (c), (d) and 
(e) 

25 

2(a), (b) and (c) 

39 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

143 

(3) 

144 

(1)(b) and (h) 

145 

 

148 

(1) 

150 

 

171 

(2) 

172 

(3) 

173 

(1)(b), 2 

174 

(e) 

179 

(1) 

189 

(3) 

Other references 

 

 

 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) -
Newsletter No. 986 

18/09/2006 

Principles: 1, 2, 3, 4 



86 
Basel Committee Newsletter No. 9 (September 2006), “The IRB Use Test: Background and 
Implementation”, referred to in this guide as “Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) - 
Newsletter No. 9”. 


87 
See Article 179(1), sub-paragraph 2, of the CRR. 


 


6.2 Use test requirement 


93. The ECB acknowledges that the degree of use of internal ratings and default 
and loss estimates in the institution’s risk management and decision-making 
process, and in its credit approval, internal capital allocation and corporate 
governance functions, is more extensive for PD/internal ratings than for 
LGD/loss estimates and CCFs. 
94. Moreover, the IRB risk parameters can be used in an adjusted form or indirectly 
through relevant risk measures/indicators stemming from the rating systems, 
provided that differences from the regulatory parameters are fully justified and 
properly documented.87 For example, institutions may use adjusted or 



transformed IRB parameters by removing certain constraints (e.g. downturn 
effect, conservative add-on, floor) or adjusting the time horizon. 
95. The use of IRB risk parameters and their inclusion in internal policies and 
procedures enables institutions to continuously improve their accuracy and 
reliability by receiving feedback from model users. The conditions for an 
effective and beneficial feedback loop include a good understanding of the 
model, its assumptions and constraints and an adequate level of interaction 
between users, the CRCU and the validation function. 
96. Where an institution requests initial permission to use the IRB approach or 
initial permission to use own estimates of LGD or CCF in the context of 
sequential implementation of the IRB approach, the institution should provide 
evidence that rating systems which are broadly in line with the IRB 
requirements of the CRR have been used for risk management, decision-
making and credit approval processes for at least three years as part of the 
prior experience requirement set out in Article 145(1) and (2) of the CRR and 
Article 22 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439. 
97. Where an institution makes a request to extend the IRB approach to a new 
legal entity (that is not yet using the IRB approach) or to extend it to additional 
exposures, Article 145(3) of the CRR provides that if the use of the rating 
systems is extended to exposures that are significantly different from the scope 
of existing coverage, such that the existing experience cannot be reasonably 
assumed to be sufficient to the requirements of Article 145(1) and (2), the 
institution should provide evidence that the requirements of Article 145(1) and 
(2) have been met. If the use of the rating systems is extended to additional 
exposures that are not significantly different from the scope of the existing 
coverage, it is the ECB’s understanding that: 
(a) if the request is for calculation of own funds requirements at consolidated 
level only, the conditions of Article 145(1) and (2) may be considered as 
having been met considering the existing experience of the institution; 
(b) if the request is for calculation of own funds requirements at consolidated 
and individual levels, the institution should provide evidence that the 
conditions of Article 145(1) and (2) have been met for the new legal entity. 





Where, following the consolidation and while the institution is returning to 
compliance, a single exposure is in the scope of the IRB rating systems of the 
acquirer and of the target, the institution should have appropriate processes in 
place to prevent a rating system from used for the purpose of reducing own 
funds requirements. 


6.3 Risk management, credit approval and decision-making process 


98. As set out in Article 144(1)(b) of the CRR, internal ratings and default and loss 
estimates produced by the rating systems must play an essential role in the risk 



management and decision-making process and in credit approval. To ensure 
that they are able to play this essential role, institutions should use internal 
ratings and default and loss estimates in the approval, restructuring and 
renewal of credit facilities, and in lending policies and the monitoring process for 
obligors and exposures. This should be formally included in the institution’s 
internal policies. 
(a) Credit approval 
The ECB considers that institutions comply with the requirement to use the 
internal ratings and default and loss estimates in the approval, 
restructuring and renewal of credit facilities if they establish the following. 
(i) Institutions incorporate the internal rating systems in the overall credit 
granting, restructuring and renewal process. Related policies are 
calibrated on the basis of rating classes or groups of rating classes or 
risk parameters. 
(ii) For the incorporation of internal rating systems to be beneficial, staff 
involved in the credit granting, restructuring and renewal process 
need to have sufficient knowledge of the rating systems, including 
their strengths and limitations. This encompasses the inclusion of 
rating system users’ feedback in model development and 
maintenance as well as having appropriate training programmes in 
place. 
(iii) The assignment or updating of ratings is a prerequisite for the 
assessment underlying the granting and reviewing of credit lines. 
(iv) Lending policies include specific references to the use of internal 
rating systems and related parameters (for instance, use of a grid of 
parameters in the decision-making process). These parameters serve 
as an indicator of riskiness (e.g. in terms of expected loss (EL)). They 
may be differentiated by institutions’ portfolios (e.g. retail/non-retail) 
and by facility type. 



(b) Risk management – monitoring process for obligors and exposures 





The ECB considers that institutions comply with the requirement to use the 
internal ratings and default and loss estimates in their lending policies, 
including exposure limits and mitigation techniques, if those policies have 
the following features. 


The ECB considers that institutions comply with the requirement to use 
their internal ratings and default and loss estimates in respect of the 
monitoring process for obligors and exposures if the following is 
established. 


Individuals in charge of the monitoring process are promptly provided with 
adequate information on the development of counterparties’ credit risk as 


expressed by ratings, so that the relevant information can be easily 
incorporated in the process and trigger appropriate actions. 


99. In addition, institutions should consider taking into account the internal ratings 
and default and loss estimates produced by the rating systems in the five areas 
shown below. If an institution decides to take into account the internal ratings 
and default and loss estimates in any of these five areas, this should be 
formally included in its internal policies.88 If an institution is not using internal 
ratings or risk parameters in one or several of these areas, it should properly 
document and justify the rationale for that to ensure that discrepancies are 
explained in a sound and understandable manner. 
(a) Pricing of transactions 
(i) Internal ratings and risk estimates can be considered in the pricing of 
transactions, in particular for non-retail exposures. 
(ii) The methodology underlying pricing can be documented and the use 
of risk-adjusted performance indicators (e.g. return on risk-adjusted 
capital – RORAC) or adjusted IRB parameters is considered as good 
practice for pricing estimation. 



(b) Early warning systems 
(i) Early warning systems can be applied to all the institution’s 
exposures and can be tailored to its specific sub-portfolios (with at 
least a distinction between retail and non-retail exposures). 
(ii) PD/ratings dynamics (i.e. downgrades) and other indicators linked to 
other risk measures (e.g. EL, loan-to-value, overdraft) can be taken 
into account in the institution’s early warning system – at least for the 
most relevant portfolios. Whenever an anomaly is detected, 
appropriate risk management decisions can be triggered. This 
process can be adjusted depending on the persistency and intensity 
of the warning. It can also be designed according to other variables 
such as exposure size or facility type. 



(c) Collection and recovery policies and processes 
(i) Regarding the collection process, institutions can have risk 
management procedures in place which are triggered in advance of 
the exposure’s default (e.g. early collection calls) and are based – 
among other indicators – on their internal ratings or risk drivers. 
(ii) Regarding the recovery process, institutions can have in place rules, 
strategies or procedures that take into consideration, inter alia, their 
LGD/expected loss best estimate (ELBE) values, as well as their set-
aside provisions. 








88 
See Article 19(2) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439. 



(d) Credit risk adjustments 
(i) The credit risk adjustments methodology for both performing 
exposures and exposures in default (or share of exposures in default) 
can be aligned to the calculation of own funds requirements, although 
some adjustments might be needed to comply with accounting 
standards (for example, International Financial Reporting Standards 9 
(IFRS 9)). The institution should justify and document any significant 
deviations to ensure that the rationale for discrepancies is sound and 
understandable. 



(e) Allocation or delegation of competence for the approval process 
(i) Along with the materiality of credit lines, the delegation of 
competences for credit approval can take risk estimates into account 
through one or several IRB parameters or through EL (for example, 
an increase of some EL-driven measures above a pre-defined 
threshold should typically trigger an escalation process). 
(ii) The allocation and delegation process can include the criterion of 
proportionality, taking into account portfolio risk and facility types. 





6.4 Internal capital assessment and allocation 


100. Internal ratings and the default and loss estimates produced by the rating 
systems play an important role in the assessment, calculation and allocation of 
institutions’ internal capital89 under the framework of the internal capital 
adequacy assessment process (RWEAs can also be used as an additional 
driver). This role should be reflected within the institutions’ internal policies and 
procedures on internal capital assessment and allocation. 


89 
See Article 144(1)(b) of the CRR. 


90 
See Article 144(1)(b) of the CRR. 


6.5 Corporate governance functions 


101. Internal ratings and the default and loss estimates produced by the rating 
systems play an important role in the institution’s corporate governance 
functions.90 To ensure that they are able to play this essential role, institutions 
should use internal ratings and default and loss estimates, in particular in their 
management reporting and portfolio credit risk monitoring procedures. This role 
should be reflected within the institutions’ internal policies. 
102. The ECB considers that institutions comply with the requirement to use the 
internal ratings and default and loss estimates in their corporate governance 
functions if they establish the following. 



(a) Institutions’ management reporting91 
(i) Institutions have a structured reporting system on risk measured by 
their IRB risk parameters. This reporting framework contains 
information about frequency, recipients and contents (if possible 
broken down by segment, portfolio and product). 
(ii) The reports are accompanied by comments and explanations on the 
numbers provided as well as by qualitative assessments, to enable 
recipients to fully understand the potential underlying risks. 



(b) Portfolio credit risk monitoring 
(i) In its ongoing model monitoring function, the CRCU performs 
descriptive analyses of portfolio riskiness (distribution of exposures 
among rating classes, average risk estimates and their realisations, 
ELs). These analyses are progressively refined to include the 
analytical insights derived from the information on ratings.92 
(ii) Reporting to senior management provides a concise but complete 
overview of the relevant variables93 so that the evolution of credit risk 
can be monitored at portfolio level. 








91 
See also Section 3.4 of this chapter for further details. 


92 
For example: highlighting, in aggregate terms, the volume of credits whose rating has worsened by 
more than one class (“double downgrade”); rating stability; the speed and frequency of rating 
modifications; the incidence of defaults; the relationship between “upgrade” and “downgrade” at 
portfolio level in a given period of time; and changes in rating by line of business, market segment or 
type of credit line. 


93 
At least those defined in Article 189(3) of the CRR. 


6.6 Assignment of exposures to grades or pools 


6.6.1 Non-rated exposures and outdated ratings 


103. Article 144(1)(h) of the CRR requires institutions to assign and continue with 
assigning each exposure in the range of application of a rating system to a 
rating grade or pool of this rating system. Furthermore, and in accordance with 
Article 173(1)(b) of the CRR, institutions must review those assignments at 
least annually. Nevertheless, the ECB observes that institutions’ portfolios 
occasionally show a certain proportion of non-rated exposures and/or outdated 
ratings. The ECB considers that this should be properly investigated, justified, 
documented and monitored. 
(a) Root causes 






(i) Non-rated exposures are temporary exceptions to the “ordinary” 
rating assignment process and should therefore be investigated, 
documented and justified in detail. 
(ii) Outdated ratings include both ratings that have not been updated 
within the 12-month period following the last rating date94 and ratings 
based on outdated information.95 



(b) Materiality 
(i) Non-rated exposures and outdated ratings present a risk for 
institutions of not being compliant with the CRR requirements related 
to rating systems. To mitigate that risk, institutions should implement 
specific policies and procedures to identify these non-rated 
exposures and outdated ratings and monitor their materiality (in terms 
of number, EAD and RWEAs). A formal check should be carried out 
on these issues, at least annually, and reported to senior 
management. These items should also be reviewed periodically by 
the internal validation function. 



(a) the transition period begins 12 months after the date the current rating was 
assigned or when new material information on the obligor or exposure 
became available (if earlier); 
(b) the transition period does not exceed three months; 
(c) the transition period applies: 
(i) to wholesale exposures whose rating assignment relies on external 
information (e.g. financial statements), which may be 
available/published not exactly 12 months apart; or 
(ii) in the presence of exceptional internal impediments that affect the 
timely review of the rating assignment; 



(d) adequate monitoring and reporting policies, together with escalation 
procedures, are implemented to ensure a rapid return to compliance; 
restrictions to credit granting or to delegation of powers for credit approval 
are also envisaged for those counterparties whose rating falls within the 
transition period; 
(e) conservative treatments apply after three months, as detailed in paragraph 
105. 





104. With regard to ratings not updated within the 12-month period following the 
most recent rating date, a transition period during which the current rating is 
carried forward can be considered provided all the following conditions are met: 


94 
See related requirements in Article 173(1)(b) and 173(2) of the CRR. 


95 
For instance, when financial information is used in the rating assignment process, it should be taken 
from financial statements dating back no more than two years. 



105. All exposures within the range of application96 of an IRB rating system must 
eventually be rated97 and are not expected to be treated under the SA, unless 
they have received the permission of the competent authority to be permanently 
treated under that approach in accordance with Article 150 of the CRR.98 Non-
rated exposures and outdated ratings present a risk of potential 
underestimation of own funds requirements. To mitigate that risk, institutions 
should adhere to the following guidance. 
(a) Institutions should have internal policies in place establishing a process to 
monitor and manage non-rated exposures and outdated ratings 
prudentially. In particular, they should be able to prove that their 
procedures allow for a conservative measure of risk, such as time-
dependent downgrading for outdated ratings and the application of the 
worst-performing rating grade for unrated exposures.99 
(b) The calibration of the prudential treatment should be validated at least 
annually (evidence of conservativeness). 





96 
The range of application refers to Article 143(3) of the CRR and thus to all exposures of the relevant 
type of exposure for which that rating system has been developed and approved. 


97 
See Article 144(1)(h) of the CRR. 


98 
See Article 148(1) of the CRR. 


99 
To avoid any distortion of risk estimates, institutions should ensure that these ex-post conservative 
adjustments are not included in the calibration dataset. 


100 
See Article 172(3) of the CRR. 


6.6.2 Analysis of overrides 


106. For grade and pool assignments institutions must document the situations in 
which human judgement may override the inputs or outputs of the rating system 
and the personnel responsible for approving these overrides. 
107. For the purposes of this subsection, instances of overruling of internal policies 
and/or procedures are not considered as overrides. If institutions overrule 
internal policies and/or procedures, they should, as in the case of overrides, 
document these instances and report them to the relevant functions (e.g. 
CRCU, internal validation function). The functions concerned should assess the 
performance of the exposures affected by the overruling and its potential impact 
on the rating systems. 
108. As a general principle, the rating of retail exposures is less likely to be affected 
by an override process, given the high degree of standardisation of information 
processing – including in qualitative terms – and the small margins of discretion 
in the evaluation. 
109. “For grade and pool assignments institutions shall document those situations in 
which human judgement may override the inputs or outputs of the assignment 
process.”100 Accordingly, institutions should have documented policies that 
incorporate the following principles: 



(a) the policies include clear and exhaustive justifications for triggering the 
override process on the basis of pertinent and significant information for an 
accurate assessment of the counterparty’s creditworthiness; 
(b) the policies define the maximum extent of overrides (in terms of, for 
example, maximum number of notches up101 and maximum share of 
overridden exposures), also considering model/portfolio specificities; 
institutions should aim to be more restrictive with positive overrides than 
with negative ones. 
(a) Performance analysis of the rating systems, to assess whether the 
judgemental adjustments improve their discriminatory power. The analysis 
may be extended to all of the underlying components (modules) of the 
rating system. It is deemed particularly useful to measure the difference in 
terms of performance and impact of the “pre-override” and “post-override” 
stages. 
(b) Other analyses, including the assessment of the distribution of overrides 
by override root cause, i.e. if there is a situation that systematically triggers 
an adjustment and that could justify an adjustment to the model (for 
example the inclusion of a specific risk driver). 





110. Institutions must document each override.102 To this end, they should retain the 
quantitative and qualitative information concerning each phase of the rating 
process. In particular, all decisions taken throughout the process – including 
interim ratings – should be recorded, as should the reasons for any override. 
The information should be proportionate to the severity and extent of the 
override. 
111. “Institutions shall analyse the performance of those exposures whose 
assignments have been overridden.”103 To comply with this requirement, the 
institutions should carry out the following procedures. 
112. To mitigate the risks identified through the aforementioned analyses (paragraph 
111), institutions should identify specific criteria for assessing whether or not the 
number of and justifications for overrides indicate significant weaknesses in the 
rating system and whether this is a reason to take ad hoc actions (e.g. a model 
change). In general, situations where there are too many overrides could be a 
strong indicator of weaknesses in the model (i.e. systematic and material 
adjustments can be the consequence of a misspecification of the model). 


101 
Where “up” refers to the direction of non-conservative overwrites. 


102 
See Article 172(3) of the CRR. 


103 
See Article 172(3) of the CRR. 



7 Management of changes to the IRB approach 


7.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 7 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

83, 84 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

143 

(3) and (4) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 

12/03/2014 

2, 3, 4, 5, 8, Annex 1 

 



 


113. Changes to a rating system’s range of application or to a rating system itself are 
subject to approval by the competent authorities if assessed as material, or to 
ex ante or ex post notification if non-material. 
114. Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 requires institutions to 
assess and classify the materiality of changes to rating systems. To comply with 
these requirements in a comprehensive and consistent way, institutions should 
establish a policy related to changes to the IRB approach (“change policy”). In 
line with the above, this policy should include, in particular, detailed criteria to 
ensure that the classification of changes is consistent and that any arbitrage in 
that regard is avoided. Institutions are encouraged to share their policy with the 
competent authority and inform the latter about any implemented modifications 
to it, in order for both sides to have a common understanding of the 
classification process. 


7.2 Content of the change policy 


115. The change policy should include provisions relating to the operationalisation of 
the requirements of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 with 
respect to the materiality assessment, classification, impact assessment, 
notification and documentation of changes and extensions.104 To that end, it 
should include, in particular, the following.105 
(a) Responsibilities, reporting lines and procedures for the internal approval of 
changes, taking into account the institution’s organisational characteristics. 
This policy should define at least the unit(s) responsible for the 
assessment and classification of changes or extensions, as well as the 
function/committee responsible for confirming and countersigning the 
classification. 





104 
Articles 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014. 


105 
Article 84 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 provides for a comparable set of 
policy elements. 



(b) Definitions, methods and, where applicable, metrics and significance 
levels for the impact assessment, threshold calculation and classification 
of changes; in particular, the quantitative/qualitative criteria referred to in 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014. In addition, as 
required by Annex 1, Part 2, Section 1 of the Regulation and to ensure 
consistency, the following should be observed: 
(i) the institution should specify metrics and significance levels that 
define the significance/materiality of changes in the distribution 
across rating grades produced by changes to the rating methodology 
(paragraph 2(d)(ii) of Annex 1, Part 2, Section 1); these metrics and 
significance levels should be complementary to those of Article 4(2) 
and (3) and Article 5(2) of the same Regulation; 
(ii) the institution should specify metrics and significance levels that 
define the significance/materiality of rating migrations produced by 
changes in the rating system's assumptions on the impact of 
economic conditions (paragraph 2(c)); 
(iii) the institution should specify metrics and significance levels that 
define the significance/materiality of changes in the rank ordering of 
clients/exposures (paragraph 2(d)(i)); 
(iv) in its change policy, the institution should define which changes 
constitute a change in the fundamental methodology for estimating 
PDs, LGDs (including best estimate of EL) and CCFs and are 
considered as material in the sense of paragraph 2(f) (as opposed to 
the changes referred to in paragraph 2(h) of Annex 1, Part 2, Section 
2); 
(v) the institution’s change policy should include a definition of changes 
in the validation methodology and/or validation processes which lead 
to changes in its judgement of the accuracy and consistency of the 
estimation of the relevant risk parameters, the rating processes or the 
performance of the rating systems (paragraph 4 of Section 1). 



(c) Procedures to identify and monitor changes, and to notify and apply to the 
competent authorities for permission to make such changes. In particular, 
institutions should establish an end-to-end process from identification to 
notification/application and describe how they perform the activities at 
each step. 
(d) Procedures for the implementation of changes, including their 
documentation; in particular, the re-rating process should be defined (if no 
other document is already in place). 



7.3 Notification 


116. To facilitate the process for submitting the documentation package defined 
under Article 8 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014, on the 
ECB Banking Supervision website the ECB has made available to institutions 
standardised templates for notifying ex ante and ex post non-material 
changes/extensions and for submitting applications for material model 
changes/extensions. Institutions are invited to use these templates to facilitate 
the process and to ensure consistency and completeness.106 


106 
In addition, further forms and guidelines have been made available on the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) website to support institutions in the pre-application process. 


7.4 Classification 


117. For the reasons mentioned in paragraph 114, institutions should have 
processes in place which specify, in detail, that the classification of a 
change/extension is adequate and consistent with the classification of other 
changes/extensions. The institution should ensure that the classification 
process is not subject to any arbitrage. In line with Article 3(3) of Commission 
Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014, “One material extension or change 
shall not be split into several changes or extensions of lower materiality”. 
Similarly, an extension or change that requires notification before its 
implementation (ex ante) should not be split into several changes or extensions 
to produce one that is notified after implementation (ex post). Nor should 
several unrelated changes/extensions be combined to produce one change of 
lower materiality (e.g. two different model changes that affect RWEAs in 
opposite ways). 
118. In accordance with Article 3(4) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
529/2014, “in case of doubt institutions shall assign extensions and changes to 
the category of the highest potential materiality”. 
119. To ensure the accuracy of the impact assessment and the correctness and 
consistency of the resulting classification, the institution should establish a four-
eye principle. This means that the assessment and classification should be 
confirmed by a unit independent of the one responsible for the assessment and 
classification of the change/extension. 


7.5 Impact assessment 


120. The impact assessment process must fulfil the requirements of Commission 
Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014. It should consist of a quantitative and 
a qualitative assessment. 
121. The quantitative assessment focuses on the impact of the change or extension 
on RWEAs. Before and after the change or extension the institution should 



calculate the difference in these amounts for credit and dilution risk associated 
with the range of application of the internal rating system. 
122. This quantitative impact assessment is based on the specifications of Article 
4(2) and (3) and Article 5(2) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
529/2014. The institution should use transparent definitions and internal 
procedures. 
(a) The institution should document the relevant reference date on which the 
calculations are based. In accordance with Article 3(2)(a) of Commission 
Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014, the institution should use the 
most recent data available. In the case of material change or ex ante 
notification the time between the reference date and the date of notification 
should not exceed nine months.107 
(b) The institution should give a precise definition of the range of application of 
the rating system applied in the calculations as referred to in Article 4(1)(c) 
and Article 5(1)(a)(iii) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
529/2014. It should ensure that the change to the IRB approach is directly 
related to exposures within the range of application of the rating system. 
(c) The institution should generally perform a precise impact assessment108 
(all exposures of the relevant range of application) when the rating system 
is automatic and does not require any human judgement of the qualitative 
variables (e.g. behavioural scoring). 
(d) If the institution applies Article 3(2)(b) of Commission Delegated 
Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 and performs an impact assessment based 
on the re-rating of a representative sample of the population (only possible 
for rating systems that require qualitative assessment to define the final 
rating/score), this sample and its relation to the population should be 
described in detail (number of observations/exposures, 
minimum/maximum exposure amount, mean/median exposure amount, 
first/third quartile). The representativeness of the sample should be 
documented. 
(e) If the institution applies Article 3(2)(b) of Commission Delegated 
Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 and performs an impact assessment based 
on other reliable inference methodologies, these methods should be 
described in detail and their reliability corroborated by qualitative and 
quantitative means. 



123. The qualitative assessment is based on the specifications of Article 4(1)(a) and 
(b) and Article 5(1)(a) points (i) and (ii) of Commission Delegated Regulation 
(EU) No 529/2014, which refer to the Annex I of that same Regulation. The 
institution should thoroughly examine each of these criteria. In addition, as 
reported in the change policy and to ensure consistency, institutions should 


107 
For impact assessments provided during an on-site inspection, the most recent data should be used. 


108 
As derived from Article 3(2) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014. 



examine the metrics and significance levels for the impact assessment and 
threshold calculation (see also Section 7.2, content of the change policy). 
124. If a criterion specified in Annex 1 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
529/2014 may be applicable a priori (and within reason) to a change or an 
extension and the institution’s assessment concludes that this particular 
criterion is not fulfilled, the institution should document this conclusion in the 
notification. 


7.5.1 User acceptance test 


125. To avoid the risk of having unexpected consequences in the use of the changed 
rating system (e.g. altered role of the changed rating system in the risk 
management of credit exposures), institutions should assess and document the 
impact of a material change/extension on the use of the parameters and ensure 
that the related internal policies and procedures for the areas described in 
Section 6.3 of this chapter remain relevant. 
126. In the context of rating systems which contain qualitative inputs and/or any 
expert judgement component, the exposures of the representative sample 
referred to in point (d) of paragraph 122 should be fully re-rated under the 
amended rating system (including the material change or extension); adherence 
to the entire rating assignment process should be ensured. The feedback 
received from users on the application of the amended rating system and on the 
rating results is expected to be analysed and documented. 
127. Changes or extensions that are classified as non-material do not generally 
require the preparation of a use test sample, unless there is evidence of a 
potential impact on the use of the parameters. 


7.6 Re-rating process 


128. Where competent authorities have provided their permission in relation to a 
material extension or change, Article 3(5) of Commission Delegated Regulation 
(EU) No 529/2014 requires institutions to calculate their own funds 
requirements on the basis of this approved extension or change from the date 
specified in the new permission. The ECB understands that this process (i.e. 
the re-rating process) should be covered in the institution’s change policy. 
129. Re-rating refers to the computation of a rating using the changed or extended 
rating system and the assignment of this new rating to an obligor previously 
rated using the rating system as it was before the change or extension. 
130. In the context of changes or extensions that are classified as material, the 
change policy should ensure that the re-rating process is immediate. All former 
ratings and estimates should therefore be replaced by ratings and estimates 
calculated using the changed or extended model from the date specified in the 



approval decision – if the conceptual design allows this. This applies, for 
example, to rating systems that are exclusively based on behavioural scoring or 
in the case of recalibration not affecting the rating process. 
131. If an immediate re-rating is not possible (for example if the rating assignment 
requires new manual input and human judgement), and only for non-retail rating 
systems, the policy should ensure the following. 
(a) The obligors/exposures/facilities are rated using the amended rating 
system within the time frame of the yearly re-rating process, i.e. within a 
maximum of 12 months. 
(b) To mitigate the risk of underestimation of own funds requirements, in the 
event that a material change would lead to a material increase in the 
RWEA (i.e. more than 10% on the range of application of the rating system 
subject to change), the institution should apply the RWEA impact, 
simulated on the basis of the representative sample. The impact thus 
produced is the positive difference between the simulated RWEA after the 
material change and the RWEA before the material change approved by 
the competent authority. This should be done at the first Common 
Reporting date after the date of implementation. 
• apply the simulated RWEA impact until all exposures within the range of 
application are rated using the changed model; 
• remove the simulated RWEA impact linearly, i.e. 25% every quarter. 





For the purpose of point (b) above, the ECB would consider the following 
approach as the most appropriate: 


132. The re-rating process for changes/extensions that are classified as non-material 
may take up to one year from the date of implementation. 



8 Third-party involvement 


8.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 8 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

4 

(1) to (4) 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

144 

(1) 

171 

 

179 

(2) 

190 

(3) and (4) 

Other references 

 

 

 

EBA Guidelines on outsourcing109 

25/02/2019 

 



109 
EBA Guidelines on outsourcing (EBA/GL/2019/02), referred to in this guide as the “EBA Guidelines on 
outsourcing”. 


110 
For generic requirements on outsourcing, such as the existence of an outsourcing policy, contract 
requirements, monitoring of third-party performance and a contingency plan for interruption of service, 
institutions must take into consideration the generic guidelines set out in the EBA Guidelines on 
outsourcing. 


 


8.2 Preliminary principles 


133. Outsourcing, as defined in the EBA Guidelines on outsourcing, refers to an 
authorised entity’s use of a third party (the “service provider”) to perform 
activities that would normally be undertaken by the authorised entity itself, now 
or in the future. For the purposes of this section, outsourcing in the context of 
IRB models refers to the involvement of third parties in any IRB-related tasks, 
including data provisioning and the use of external data (e.g. development data, 
calibration data, external ratings as input for internal models, pooled data). The 
specific case of delegation of IRB-related tasks to different legal entities within 
the same group (internal outsourcing) is also considered as outsourcing and 
hence is subject to the expectations set out below.110 


8.2.1 Contract requirements 


134. All outsourcing arrangements for IRB-related tasks should be subject to a 
formal and comprehensive contract or similar documented agreement in 
accordance with the proportionality principle (in the case of internal outsourcing 
between different entities within the same group, provisions such as service 
level agreements (SLAs) or other written agreements may be considered as 
sufficient, subject to the criticality or importance of the tasks outsourced). 
Outsourcing institutions should take into account the aspects set out in Section 



13 of the EBA Guidelines on outsourcing when preparing written outsourcing 
contracts. To avoid operational risks which could hinder the performance and 
operations of the rating systems, outsourcing agreements should provide for the 
following. 
(a) The agreed terms do not impede the institution in performing its validation 
activities. 
(b) The agreed terms do not impede the necessary communication between 
the institution and the competent authorities in performing their supervisory 
duties. In this sense they should include: 
(i) full and timely access for competent authorities to all information 
required (e.g. all of the models’ development details, where an 
externally developed rating system is used); 
(ii) a requirement for the third party to provide support to the institution in 
the event of a request for information by the competent authority. 



(c) The agreed terms should ensure that the provider gives the institution 
access to relevant information in order to maintain sufficient in-house 
knowledge. The delivery of training and workshops is considered good 
practice. 





8.3 Third-party involvement in internal functions and tasks 


8.3.1 Internal validation and internal audit tasks 


135. Although institutions are allowed to delegate some of their tasks, activities and 
functions to a third party, this should be done in accordance with all existing 
legal requirements and after due consideration of this guide, in particular the 
principles relating to internal validation and the internal audit included in this 
general topics chapter. If an institution plans to delegate certain internal 
validation or internal audit tasks to a third party that would perform them outside 
the EU, it should discuss this plan with the competent authority in advance. 
136. The ECB considers that responsibility for delegated tasks should be retained by 
the outsourcing institution.111 This understanding is also expressed in 
paragraph 35 of the EBA Guidelines on outsourcing. 
137. To ensure consistency in the content, quality and governance of the activities 
performed internally and externally, the ECB understands that the following 
practices in particular should be observed: 


111 
This also applies in the case of internal outsourcing. 



(a) Reports should carry the logo and name of the institution and of the third 
party performing the tasks. 
(b) Reports should be approved by the senior management and the members 
of the management body (or the designated committee thereof) 
responsible for the function within the institution. 
(c) The institution should assess the quality/performance of the outsourced 
tasks. 
(d) The independence requirements set out in Section 1.6 for internal 
validation and Section 1.7 for internal audit of this chapter also apply to 
external parties. Institutions must ensure that model reviews are 
independent and free from any undue influence, also when performed by 
third parties. In this respect institutions should establish independence 
guidelines/policies with regard to third parties and those participating in 
internal model tasks equivalent to the internal guidelines and rules set 
internally. In particular, third parties and individuals that have performed or 
are currently performing model development or CRCU tasks should not 
perform model validation tasks within the same institution until a prudent 
cool-off period has elapsed.112,113 


112 
In the case of internal outsourcing or delegation of tasks within different legal entities of the same 
group, “third party” refers to the unit/function that would perform the delegated tasks. 


113 
In the light of Article 4(2)(c) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439, the third party 
may provide the institution with the information necessary to conduct the validation activities. 


114 
See Article 171(2) of the CRR. 


115 
See also the credit risk chapter on the use of external data. 


116 
See Article 179(2) of the CRR and in particular sub-paragraph (e). 


8.3.2 Use of external credit risk parameters/ratings 


138. Although institutions are allowed to use external credit risk parameters as a 
component of their rating systems, the following practices should be observed: 
(a) Internal ratings and estimates methodology should also take internal 
information into account.114 When institutions use external ratings or 
parameters, they should ensure that these are incorporated in their 
estimation process in an appropriate manner and adjusted in accordance 
with the specificities of the institution.115 
(b) Analogously to the requirements for data pooled across institutions,116 the 
institution should demonstrate good knowledge of the work performed by 
the third party in producing the estimates. In particular, the institution 
should demonstrate a good understanding of the data cleansing process, 
assumptions used, methodological choices and resulting limitations. The 
institution should also monitor the performance of the rating systems 
involved and be able to audit them, and have clear triggers for requesting 
a model review. 






8.3.3 Model development and maintenance 


139. When institutions delegate the development and/or maintenance of internal 
models, this should be done in accordance with all existing regulatory 
requirements and the institutions’ internal guidelines and policies, also taking 
this guide into account. If an institution plans to delegate such tasks to a third 
party that would perform them outside the EU, it is encouraged to discuss this 
with the competent authority in advance. 
140. As the ultimate model owners and users, institutions should do the following: 
(a) maintain an appropriate level of in-house knowledge (see Section 8.3.5 of 
this chapter); 
(b) have a robust contingency plan in place to ensure that they are prepared 
for the risk that could derive from insufficient maintenance of the rating 
systems. 





8.3.4 Use of pool models 


141. In accordance with Article 179(2)(d) of the CRR, an institution using pool 
models must remain responsible for the integrity of its rating systems. In 
particular, the institution is ultimately responsible for the performance of the 
internal validation activities as elaborated in Section 4 of this chapter. 
142. To comply with the requirement to ensure integrity of the rating system specified 
in Article 179(2)(d) of the CRR, if deficiencies are identified in the pooled rating 
system at institution level, the institution should be able to independently trigger 
a procedure designed to amend the system, if necessary, at individual or pool 
level. This applies regardless of the performance of the rating system at the 
pool level or at the level of the other participating institutions. 
143. Where a third party is involved in the tasks of developing a rating system and 
risk estimation for an institution, the institution should verify that the validation 
activities with regard to those rating system and those risk estimates are not 
performed by that third party. Where, for the purpose of developing a rating 
system and risk estimation, the institution uses data that is pooled across 
institutions and a third party is developing the rating system, the third party may 
assist the institution in its validation activities by performing those tasks of 
validation which require access to the pooled data.117 


117 
See Article 4(3) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439. 


8.3.5 In-house knowledge 


144. To ensure that institutions are able to identify, manage and monitor the risks 
connected with internal models, they should maintain adequate in-house 



knowledge and core competence, as they are ultimately responsible for 
outsourced tasks and functions. Institutions should have access to all relevant 
information; this will enable them to take direct control of an outsourced activity 
in extremis. Best practice to ensure that this in-house knowledge is maintained 
includes ad hoc training at all levels (not only at management level) and proper 
oversight of the outsourced activities. 
145. In the relationship with the third party, and for the purpose of maintaining 
appropriate in-house knowledge and responsibilities, the ECB would consider 
the following practices as being advisable in the event of third-party involvement 
in IRB-related tasks: 
(a) the terms of the contract include transparency requirements; 
(b) the institution has full access to all relevant information regarding internal 
model-related topics; 
(c) the institution receives regular reports; 
(d) on request, the institution is provided with specific reports; 
(e) on request, the third party provides support and attends interviews with the 
competent authorities. 



146. In cases where third parties are involved in model (re-)development and/or 
parameter (re-)calibration, to ensure that the institution maintains sufficient in-
house knowledge and an adequate understanding of the rating system or that 
part of the rating system obtained from the third party118, the ECB would 
consider the following practices as being advisable with regard to both the 
methodology and the data used for (re-)development and (re-)calibration: 
(a) The institution has access to all relevant information that enables it to 
understand the main model assumptions and risk estimation processes. 
(b) The institution has access to its own obligors’ information. 
(c) In cases where pooled or external data are used for model development or 
calibration, the institution is able to assess to what degree the portfolio on 
which the model is based/developed is representative of its own portfolio, 
for the purposes of risk differentiation and risk quantification. 
(d) The institution has sufficient knowledge of the definition of default applied 
for the purposes of risk differentiation and risk quantification. 
(e) The institution has access to all necessary information to enable it to 
perform independent validation, including the validation of the model 
assumptions and performance of its own portfolio. 





118 
See Article 4(1)(b) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 and paragraph 142 of this 
chapter. 



(f) The institution has a specific change policy in place for models developed 
by third parties. 
(g) The institution is able to assess the need for a model change. The criteria 
that trigger a model change should be reflected in both the institution’s 
model change policy and the contract with the third party, to ensure that 
the institution is able to make or request changes to the models. 


8.3.6 Independent monitoring of third-party performance 


147. To ensure that it is able to identify and manage the risks connected with internal 
model-related outsourced tasks, the institution should also independently 
monitor the performance of third parties and have appropriate processes in 
place in this regard. This practice reinforces the fact that the institutions are the 
ultimate users of the rating systems and thus have the ultimate responsibility for 
their operations. 
148. The following are considered by the ECB as good practices with regard to 
monitoring third-party provisioning of external data. 
(a) Similar data vetting should be performed as would be the case if the data 
or service were provided in-house. Data quality checks should be 
automated (IT/batch processes) when possible, and technical issues as 
well as reasonableness and consistency should be considered. 
(b) Historical differences in the data provided should trigger inquiries if 
justified, or if there has been an error. 
(c) Where external data are used, their representativeness, appropriateness 
and consistency with regard to the institution should be assessed. 
(d) Cross-checks should be carried out between different databases (when 
available) or between different providers. This is a sign of consistency and 
robustness. 
(e) SLAs/contract agreements should include the required specific key 
performance indicators (KPIs) and performance metrics. 
(f) It should be recognised that the data quality of the information provided 
cannot be determined by its predictive power or by the performance of the 
model itself. 



149. The following are considered by the ECB as good practices with regard to 
monitoring third-party IRB-related tasks: 
(a) the same standards of monitoring and audit should be applied to external 
tasks as to those performed in-house; 
(b) SLAs/contract agreements should include the specific KPIs and 
performance metrics that the service should include; 






(c) specific bodies should be designated, with clear responsibilities regarding 
the monitoring of external IRB activities (such as a monitoring committee). 





 


Credit risk 


1 Scope of the credit risk chapter 


1. The purpose of this chapter is to provide transparency on how the ECB 
understands a number of topics related to internal models used for the IRB 
approach, including an initial section covering data maintenance for this 
approach. It is important to note that this chapter does not aim to cover 
exhaustively all topics of the CRR for the IRB approach that could be subject to 
review during internal model investigations. On these selected topics, the 
chapter is aligned with the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD.1 


1 
EBA Guidelines on PD estimation, LGD estimation and the treatment of defaulted exposures 
(EBA/GL/2017/16), referred to in this guide as the “EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD”. 


2 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 of 20 October 2022 supplementing Regulation 
(EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical 
standards for the specification of the assessment methodology competent authorities are to follow 
when assessing the compliance of credit institutions and investment firms with the requirements to use 
the Internal Ratings Based Approach (OJ L 90, 18.3.2022, p.1), referred to in this guide as 
“Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439”. 


3 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision “Principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk 
reporting”, referred to in this guide as “Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 239”. 


2 Data maintenance for the IRB approach 


2.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 9 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

142 

(1)(1) 

144 

 

174 

(b) 

175 

(1) 

176 

 

189 

(1), (2)(c) 

190 

(4) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/4392 

20/10/2021 

31, 32, 72, 73, 74, 75 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 2393 

09/01/2013 

Principles 1-11 



 


2. In accordance with Article 
144(1) of the CRR, an institution’s systems for the 
management and rating of credit risk exposures must be sound and 
implemented with integrity. In particular, the institution must collect and store all 
relevant data to provide effective support to its credit risk measurement and 



management processes. The ECB understands that, in order to comply with 
these requirements, institutions should deploy robust, well-documented and 
adequately tested IT systems, together with sound data management practices. 
3. Consequently, this section of the guide sets out the principles regarding the 
following elements for the management of IRB data:4 
(a) IT systems: infrastructure and implementation testing; 
(b) policies, roles and responsibilities in data processing and data quality 
management; 
(c) components of the data quality management framework. 





4 
The ECB acknowledges that there are other relevant elements of data management not covered in this 
guide which institutions should take into account. 


5 
See Articles 
144(1)(d) and 176 of the CRR. 


6 
This refers to the model’s internal data, external data or pooled data. 


7 
This refers to the first entry or registration of data in the institutions’ systems and applications or in the 
core systems of the institutions where the raw data first originated. 


2.2 IT systems: infrastructure and implementation testing 


2.2.1 Infrastructure 


4. Sound and robust IT infrastructures play an essential role in supporting the 
institution’s rating systems. In addition, and in accordance with Article 
175(1) of 
the CRR, institutions must document the design and operational details of their 
rating systems. 
5. With regard to the soundness and robustness of institutions’ IT infrastructure, 
the ECB considers that Article 
75(2) and (3) of Commission Delegated 
Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 provides a good understanding of the elements 
that institutions should take into account in order to comply with the data-related 
requirements of the CRR.5 
6. Furthermore, to comply with the documentation requirements for the rating 
systems as established under Article 
144(1)(e) and Article 
175(1) of the CRR, it 
is the ECB’s view that institutions should document and keep an updated 
register of all current and past versions of the following elements of a rating 
system: 
(a) the model’s data6 flow (from data entry7 to reporting and for both historical 
data and current exposure data), identifying the relevant workflows and 
procedures relating to data extraction, data collection, data storage and 
data transformations; 






(b) the relevant sources of data and the global map of IT systems and 
databases involved in the calculation systems used for the purposes of the 
IRB approach; 
(c) the relevant functional specification of IT systems and databases, including 
their size, date of construction and data dictionaries, specifying the content 
of the fields and of the different valid data values that could be inserted in 
them, with clear definitions of data items; 
(d) the relevant technical specification of IT systems and databases, including 
the type of database, tables, database management system, database 
architecture, and data models given in any standard data modelling 
notation; 
(e) the audit trail for critical IT systems and databases. 





To allow an independent knowledgeable third party to obtain a detailed outline 
of the different IT elements of the rating systems, the documentation produced 
by the institution should be clear and understandable. 


To comply with the requirement to document its rating system and the rationale 
for its design,8 the institution should keep the register of all rating systems, 
including all current and past versions of rating systems, updated for a period of 
at least three years and, whenever necessary, an extended period beyond that. 
This is also reflected in Article 
32(1) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 
No 2022/439. In any case, the institution should ensure that the elements 
mentioned in paragraph 
6(a) to (e) for the current rating system are adequately 
recorded in the register and enable a clear understanding of all relevant data of 
the current rating system that must be stored by the institution.9 


8 
See Article 
144(1)(e) of the CRR. 


9 
See Articles 
144(1)(d) and 176 of the CRR. 


10 
In other words a complete version of the IT environments described in paragraphs 7(a)7(a) to (f), where 
the institution will in fact implement the model and produce COREP reporting on the basis of the IRB 
approach once initial permission is granted. 


11 
The non-live production environment should be understood in this context as a parallel version of a live 
production environment that is already in place, as described in paragraph 8. 


2.2.2 IT implementation of a new model or model change 


7. When applying for an initial model approval or for roll-out of the IRB approach, 
the institution should provide evidence that it has implemented the proposed 
model into a live10 or, if duly justified, non-live production environment11. In 
particular, this means that the institution: 
(a) is able to produce risk parameter estimates for exposures in the scope of 
application; 
(b) has successfully completed IT user acceptance tests; 






(c) is able to calculate under the IRB approach the own funds requirements 
resulting from its risk parameters estimates; 
(d) is able to submit the respective COREP reporting (Article 144(1)(g) of the 
CRR); 
(e) is able to use the model for internal risk measurement and management 
purposes; 
(f) is ready to introduce a reporting system based on the risk parameters 
produced by the model.12 





8. When applying for a material model change, the institution should provide 
evidence that it is able to provide a new version of the relevant IT systems 
ready to be put into production once the change is approved (i.e. when applying 
for a material model change. It should also be able to fully replicate the 
execution of the model and the calculation of own funds requirements according 
to the model change in a non-live production environment, fulfilling the points 
set out in paragraphs 7(a) to (f) above). In addition, it should be able to 
demonstrate that it has set up an appropriate process to ensure that the full IT 
implementation would be completed successfully with regard to the date of 
implementation of the changed model, in accordance with the principles set out 
in paragraph 26 of the general topics chapter. 


12 
This paragraph concerns only purely IT-related aspects. Please refer to Sections 3.4 and 6 of the 
general topics chapter of this guide for concrete expectations on model use/reporting topics. 


13 
See Article 
144(1) of the CRR. 


2.2.3 Implementation testing 


9. In order to ensure the integrity and robustness of IT systems13 and in particular 
that, in terms of IT, the implementation of the models is successful and error-
free, institutions should have in place a consistent process for testing the 
relevant IRB systems and applications upon first implementation and on an 
ongoing basis. This IT-testing process should be clearly defined and 
documented in an organisation-wide policy and procedure. 
10. To achieve its objective the policy should consider all potential events that 
should trigger a testing procedure and their impact on the tests to be 
conducted. The trigger events that should be considered include: software 
releases or material IT-related changes, regulatory changes, model 
methodology changes and the extension of the range of application of a rating 
system. 
11. IT implementation tests to be considered include the following: 
(a) unit/component/module tests; 
(b) integration tests (of units and between systems); 






(c) system tests (this includes functionality, performance 
– in normal and 
stress scenarios 
– and security and portability tests); 
(d) user acceptance testing (functional testing); 
(e) regression testing. 





12. In principle, the unit(s) responsible for performing the implementation tests 
should be clearly identified and the results of the tests should be documented. It 
is the ECB’s view that as a general rule institutions should develop a 
standardised format for the documentation of test results. 


2.3 Policies, roles and responsibilities in data processing and data 
quality management 


13. For institutions to be able to comply with the requirement to collect and store all 
relevant data established under Article 
144(1)(d) of the CRR, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that policies and rules on data management should be defined at 
group level14 for both of the following aspects: data processing (i.e. 
data 
collection, storage, validation, migration, actualisation and use), and data 
quality management (see Section 
2.4 of this chapter). 
14. As for data processing, and in particular with regard to manual interventions 
and data transfers, the following principles should be considered: 
(a) to ensure that all data transformations are traceable and controlled, 
general guidelines and rules should be clearly formalised with regard to 
manual interventions within the data processing; 
(b) to ensure timeliness and accountability, all data transfers should be 
formally agreed upon (for example by means of service level agreements) 
by data providers and data users (for both outsourced and in-house 
processes). 



15. To ensure the integrity of the data processes, the policies and rules on data 
management should clearly set out the relevant data governance 
arrangements. It is also expected that these policies and rules will specify the 
different roles and responsibilities assigned to data management. These include 
data quality roles and responsibilities for both business owners and IT functions 
and data and systems ownership throughout the entire credit risk modelling life 
cycle (including all IT systems used). These policies should take into account 
the following principles. 
(a) The responsibilities of business owners include: 





14 
See Section1.2 of the general topics chapter for the definition and implementation of group-wide 
principles and guidelines. 



(i) ensuring data are correctly entered, kept up to date and aligned with 
the institution’s data definitions; 
(ii) ensuring that data aggregation capabilities and reporting practices 
are consistent with the institution’s policies. 
(b) IT functions are responsible for supporting the operation of the systems for 
data collection, processing, transformation, storage and availability during 
the entire life cycle of the data. 
(c) Different business owners and IT systems owners may be appointed 
throughout the data life cycle. However, each data source, IT system and 
process step should have an assigned business owner and/or IT systems 
owner that can be formally identified. 


2.4 Data quality management framework 


16. Institutions must have in place a process for vetting data inputs into the model. 
This must include an assessment of the accuracy, completeness and 
appropriateness of the data.15 To comply with this requirement and to ensure 
the quality of the data used for credit risk measurement and management 
processes, it is the ECB’s view that institutions should establish and implement 
an effective data quality management framework that is formalised in a set of 
policies and procedures. This framework should be applicable to all data used 
in IRB-related processes, i.e. 
internal data, external data and pooled data, if 
any. In addition, it should ensure that reliable risk information is available to 
enable an institution’s risk profile to be assessed accurately and drive sound 
decision-making within the institution and by external stakeholders, including 
competent authorities. 
17. The ECB considers that the data quality management framework is effective 
when it encompasses the following components: 
(a) sound underlying governance principles (see Section 
2.4.1 of this 
chapter), particularly those relating to the allocation and fulfilment of roles 
and responsibilities for the management of data quality in a manner that 
ensures that data quality management activities are independent of data 
processing activities; 
(b) a description of the scope in terms of risk data coverage (see 
Section 
2.4.2); 
(c) data quality standards covering all relevant data quality dimensions, 
i.e. 
completeness, accuracy, consistency, timeliness, uniqueness, validity, 
availability and traceability (see Section 
2.4.3); 





15 
See Article 
174(b) of the CRR. 



(d) consistent criteria and a systematic metrics approach to assess 
compliance with data quality standards; this should be supported by 
sufficient data quality controls along the entire IRB data chain (see 
Section 
2.4.4); 
(e) procedures for constantly assessing and improving the quality of data (see 
Section 
2.4.5); 
(f) reporting procedures on data quality allowing for sufficient understanding 
of the quality of the data supporting the IRB models (see Section 
2.4.6). 


The following sections further develop the above-mentioned elements. 


2.4.1 Governance principles for the data quality management framework 


18. The data quality management framework: 
(a) should be approved by the institution's management body or a designated 
committee thereof and senior management as part of their responsibilities; 
(b) should be distributed throughout the organisation to the relevant staff; 
(c) should be regularly assessed in order to verify its adequacy, and be 
updated and improved whenever necessary; 
(d) should be subject to regular review by the internal audit function or another 
comparable independent auditing unit.16 



19. The roles of the different units, internal bodies and staff involved in the data 
quality management process should be defined in such a way as to ensure that 
the data handling process is sufficiently independent of the data quality 
management process. 
20. The ECB considers it good practice for institutions to have a dedicated 
independent unit with an overall view of and responsibility for the management 
of data quality. Where an independent unit is established, the size of this unit 
should be proportionate to the nature, size and degree of complexity of the 
institution’s business and organisational structure. 


16 
For further details on the review of the rating systems by internal audit, see Section 
5 of the general 
topics chapter of this guide. 


2.4.2 Scope of the data quality management framework 


21. The data quality management framework: 



(a) should cover all relevant data quality dimensions: completeness, accuracy, 
consistency, timeliness, uniqueness, validity, availability and traceability 
(see paragraph 
23); 
(b) should cover the whole data life cycle, from data entry to reporting, and 
encompass both historical data and current application databases. 





22. If institutions use data provided by third parties, the ECB considers it good 
practice for them to ensure that the third party has data quality processes in 
place to ensure the accuracy, completeness and appropriateness of the data 
provided.17 


17 
See Article 
174(b) of the CRR. 


18 
It is the ECB’s view that the CRR reference to appropriateness of data inputs encompasses the 
following additional data quality dimensions: consistency, timeliness, uniqueness, validity, 
availability/accessibility and traceability. 


2.4.3 Data quality standards in the data quality management framework 


23. In accordance with Article 
174(b) of the CRR, institutions must implement a 
process for vetting data inputs into the model which must include an 
assessment of the accuracy, completeness and appropriateness of data. The 
ECB understands that, in order to comply with this requirement, institutions 
should establish data quality standards that set the objectives and overall scope 
of the data quality management process. To this end, these standards should 
be defined for the following data quality dimensions18 for all data inputs into the 
model and at each stage of the data life cycle: 
(a) completeness (values are present in any attributes that require them); 
(b) accuracy (data are substantively error-free); 
(c) consistency (a given set of data can be matched across the institution’s 
different data sources); 
(d) timeliness (data values are up to date); 
(e) uniqueness (aggregate data are free from any duplication arising from 
filters or other transformations of source data); 
(f) validity (data are founded on an adequate and rigorous classification 
system that ensures their acceptance); 
(g) availability/accessibility (data are made available to the relevant 
stakeholders); 
(h) traceability (the history, processing and location of the data under 
consideration can be easily traced). 






2.4.4 Data quality controls 


24. Data quality should be measured in an integrated and systematic way. The 
measurement system and the frequency of its application should be formalised. 
25. Indicators and their corresponding tolerance levels and thresholds should be 
set in order to monitor compliance with the standards established and should be 
combined with visual systems (e.g. 
red/amber/green traffic-light system) and 
dashboards for monitoring and reporting purposes. 
26. Indicators should be supported by effective and sufficient data quality checks 
and controls throughout the data life cycle, from data entry to reporting, and for 
both historical data and current application data. Data quality checks and 
controls should include reconciliation across and within systems, including 
between accounting and IRB data. An effective control framework should 
therefore be in place to ensure that sound controls and related procedures are 
implemented, especially for manual processes. 


2.4.5 Remediation of data quality issues 


27. A process for the identification and remediation of data quality deficiencies 
should be in place in order to constantly improve data quality and promote 
compliance with the data quality standards. 
28. Data quality assessments should be carried out independently (see 
paragraphs 
19 and 20) and recommendations should be issued with an 
indication of their priority, based on the materiality of the incidents identified. All 
such data quality incidents should be recorded and monitored. For each of the 
data quality incidents, an owner responsible for resolving the incident should be 
appointed and an action plan for dealing with the incident drawn up on the basis 
of the priority assigned. Remediation timelines should depend on the severity 
and impact of the incident and the implementation timelines required to resolve 
it. Data quality incidents should be resolved at source level19 or, if this is not 
possible, mitigated by taking a prudent approach. 


19 
From the source system in which the incidents are present down to the IRB datasets or systems. 


2.4.6 Data quality reporting 


29. In accordance with Article 
189(2)(c) of the CRR, the institution’s senior 
management must ensure, on an ongoing basis, that the ratings systems are 
working properly. To accomplish this, the ECB understands that a formal 
reporting process on the quality of risk data should be in place with the 
objective of improving the quality of data and enabling an assessment of the 
potential impact of data quality in own fund requirements calculations. In 



general, this reporting should be presented in a standardised format with clear 
and concise content, including the following: 
(a) comprehensive overview of the performance of the model in terms of data 
quality, including external data and pooled data, if any, at all stages of the 
IRB life cycle, from data entry to reporting, for both historical data and 
current exposure data; 
(b) findings and, where applicable, recommendations to address detected 
weaknesses or shortfalls; 
(c) sufficient and appropriate evidence that the recommendations have been 
adequately addressed and properly implemented (e.g. 
by means of a 
status report). 



30. In accordance with Article 
189(1) of the CRR, the management body or a 
designated committee thereof and senior management must possess a general 
understanding of the rating systems of the institution and a detailed 
comprehension of its associated management reports. To comply with this 
requirement, the ECB understands that reports on the quality of risk data should 
be submitted to these parties. In addition, the ECB considers it good practice for 
these reports to also be submitted to all other relevant staff, including 
modellers, internal validation, internal audit, data quality managers, data owners 
and other business units involved. 
31. Data quality reports should be produced and submitted to senior management 
more frequently than annually to enable senior management to ensure, on an 
ongoing basis, that the rating systems are operating properly in accordance 
with Article 
189(2)(c) of the CRR. 



3 Use of data 


3.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 10 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

144 

(1)(d) 

171 

(1)(a), (b) 

172 

(3) 

174 

(b), (c), (e) 

176 

 

178 

(4) 

179 

(1)(a), (c), (d), (2)(a), 
(b) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

42, 45, 47, 53 

 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

15-35 



 


32. In accordance with Article 
144(1)(d) of the CRR, institutions must collect and 
store all relevant data to provide effective support to their credit risk 
measurement and management processes. Furthermore, good data quality is a 
fundamental condition for developing a robust rating system. The ECB 
considers that, to comply with these requirements and ensure the quality of 
data, institutions should have sound policies, processes and methods in place, 
under paragraphs 
15 to 34 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD for assessing 
and improving the quality and representativeness of the data used in the 
modelling and risk quantification process. 
33. Since the data-related requirements of the CRR also apply in cases where an 
institution estimates CCFs, paragraph 
0 is also relevant for such institutions. 


3.2 Use of external data 


34. Data-related requirements established under the CRR apply to all data: internal, 
external or pooled. In the ECB’s understanding, therefore, paragraph 
0 is also 
relevant in the event that an institution uses external or pooled data. The 
principles on the collection and storage of data are relevant to the institutions’ 
own data and to the data received from the pool. 
35. To ensure that credit risk management and measurement processes are built 
on appropriate data, for the purposes of risk differentiation, risk quantification 
and review of estimates institutions should assess whether external data can be 
used to complement internal data when they consider they do not have 
sufficient available internal data. 



36. In addition, when institutions use different data sources (including different 
external databases, whether or not combined with internal data) for the purpose 
of risk quantification, there could be a risk that the sources include common 
obligors among the data sources used for risk quantification. This could lead to 
bias or double-counting effects in the calculation of one-year default rates. To 
avoid this risk, institutions should develop the necessary processes in order to 
identify common obligors within these databases and ensure that each common 
obligor is only taken into account once in the calculation of one-year default 
rates.20 When institutions are not able to identify common obligors, they should 
analyse potential bias or double-counting effects in the calculation of one-year 
default rates. These bias or double-counting effects should be reflected 
appropriately in the computation of one-year default rates and long-run average 
(LRA) default rates. 
37. If an institution uses statistical models and other mechanical methods to assign 
exposures to obligors or facilities grades or pools, the data used to build the 
model must be representative of the population of the institution’s actual 
obligors or facilities.21 If external data are used, the same requirements with 
regard to representativeness22 must be applicable vis-à-vis the bank’s portfolio 
or portfolio subset for which the external data are used. 
38. Proving representativeness in cases where an institution uses external data is 
generally more difficult, as internal data are scarce. If an institution cannot 
provide sufficient proof that the external data are representative, in the ECB’s 
view it may still use external data if it shows (by quantitative analysis and/or 
qualitative argumentation) that the information gained from the use of the 
external data outweighs any drawbacks stemming from the deficiencies 
identified and an appropriate margin of conservatism (MoC) is applied. In 
particular, institutions should provide evidence that the model’s performance 
does not deteriorate when including information derived from the external data, 
and that the parameter estimates23 are not biased. To assess these issues, the 
institution should conduct quantitative and qualitative analyses specifically 
designed for this purpose. 
39. In accordance with Article 
174(b) of the CRR, if an institution uses statistical 
models and other mechanical methods to assign exposures to obligors or 
facilities grades or pools, it must have in place a process for vetting data inputs 
to the model, which should include an assessment of the accuracy, 
completeness and appropriateness of the data. In addition, and in accordance 
with Article 
179(1)(a), in quantifying the risk parameters to be associated with 
rating grades or pools institutions must incorporate all relevant data, information 
and methods. To comply with these requirements, institutions should ensure 
that, when external data are used for risk differentiation, risk quantification or 


20 
If the default identification is at the level of an individual credit facility rather than at obligor level, this 
principle will not be relevant. 


21 
See Article 
174(c) of the CRR. 


22 
As established under Articles 
174(c) and 179(1)(d) of the CRR. 


23 
See paragraph 126 for the PD risk parameter. 



review of estimates, they know the data sources and the most relevant data 
processing operations of the variables acting as direct model inputs performed 
by the data provider. Institutions should be able to differentiate between internal 
and external data and to document which information is internal and which 
information is received from external data sources. To ensure that the data 
remain appropriate, institutions should provide an adequate rationale in the 
event that, for the purpose of risk differentiation, risk quantification or review of 
estimates, they modify the external data acquired, select only part of a wider 
external database or use different external providers. 


3.3 Use of external bureau scores or external ratings as input variables 
in the rating process 


40. Where an institution uses external credit bureau scores or external ratings as 
input variables in the rating process, and in particular when externally sourced 
scores are the main (or one of the main) input variable(s) of the overall internal 
rating, there is a risk that an internal model may not consider all relevant 
information. In the ECB’s understanding, institutions mitigate this risk when they 
comply with the following principles. 
(a) The external scores or ratings and/or data are regularly updated or 
refreshed, especially where credit bureau information is dynamic and is 
used not only for the application rating but also for the ongoing behavioural 
rating. 
(b) Institutions understand the structure and nature of external scores or 
ratings and their key drivers. They also regularly verify that the results of 
the credit bureau score continue to be appropriate input variables in their 
credit rating process, for example by reviewing any changes in the credit 
bureau score methodology. The greater the importance of the external 
scores or ratings, the greater understanding institutions should 
demonstrate of their structure, nature and key drivers and the higher the 
frequency that should be considered in monitoring the appropriateness of 
these external scores or ratings. 
(c) Validation requirements are similar to those applied to other internal and 
external input variables. 
(d) Even when the external score or rating is the main (or one of the main) 
driver(s) of the internal rating, the institution ensures that all relevant 
internal information regarding the creditworthiness of the obligor is taken 
into account with sufficient weighting in the internal rating. In addition, the 
institution demonstrates that the additional relevant internal information 
considered in the model and its weighting are sufficient to ensure that the 
internal rating does not merely take on the results of the external bureau 
scores or the external ratings used. 






(e) When institutions make use of external scores or ratings or any other 
judgement-based assessment provided by a third party as input variables 
in the rating process, they should ensure that any potential correlation 
between the relevant risk drivers does not lead to bias or a double-
counting effect in the risk parameter estimates. This can be especially 
relevant in these cases, due to the potential use of duplicated information. 
(f) The institution remains responsible for the performance of the model. 





3.4 Use of pooled data24 


24 
The paragraphs below are also relevant in cases where institutions use pooled data from institutions 
belonging to the same banking group. 


25 
Article 
172(3) of the CRR. 


26 
A “pool model” is deemed to be a model where institutions develop a shared or common rating model 
based on pooled data which is then applied by each participating institution to its portfolio(s). 
Institutions which pool their data may work together very closely, disclosing to each other more 
information than simply publicly available external data, and even sharing the same rating and 
validation processes. 


27 
The paragraphs below are also relevant in cases where institutions use pooled data that are generated 
from institutions belonging to the same banking group. 


41. The use of pooled data is treated similarly to the situation where internal data 
are combined with data derived from a different (and external) set of obligors or 
facilities, as mentioned in Section 
3.2. 
42. In accordance with Article 
179(2)(a) of the CRR, where an institution uses data 
that are pooled across institutions the rating systems and criteria of other 
institutions in the pool must be similar to its own. To comply with this 
requirement an institution should, among other things: 
(a) ensure that there is a common definition of the key drivers and processes; 
(b) ensure that policies and procedures considered for human judgement, 
including overrides25, can be applied in a comparable and similar manner 
across all participating institutions. 





3.5 Use of purchased rating systems or models (pool models26 27) 


43. In accordance with the last sentence of Article 
144(1) of the CRR, the 
requirements to use an IRB approach, including own estimates and CCFs, 
apply also where an institution has implemented a rating system, or model used 
within a rating system, that it has purchased from a third-party vendor. To 
comply with this provision, institutions should ensure in such cases that all 
relevant internal information for model development and parameter calibration 
is taken into account. In particular, LRAs of default rates, LGD and CCFs based 
only on internal data should always be computed and considered for calibration. 
The institution remains responsible for the performance of the rating system or 
model. 



44. In addition, to ensure the integrity of the rating systems or internal models when 
institutions make use of pool models, and to comply with Article 
144(1) of the 
CRR, the principles set out below should be followed. 
(a) If PD estimates are calculated using pooled data, institutions should verify 
that the data used for risk quantification meet the data requirements for 
default rate calculation as clarified in paragraph 
121 below, or that the data 
are adjusted accordingly. 
(b) Where several institutions use a common pool model, each should ensure 
that its rating process is aligned to the extent that all input risk drivers are 
defined in the same way across all participating institutions. The 
institutions should also ensure that all assessments of the qualitative 
components of the rating model are performed in a comparable manner. 
(c) If a pool model is used for the estimation of risk parameters and the 
model-relevant parts of the process for managing distressed obligors 
(including the strategy before and after default) of the participating 
institutions are not aligned, these differences should be appropriately 
taken into account within the model or through an appropriate adjustment, 
in accordance with paragraph 
37(a)(viii) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and 
LGD. In the case of a pool model for the estimation of LGD parameters, 
differences in the model-relevant parts of the workout processes should 
also be taken into account within the model or through an appropriate 
adjustment. 
(d) Institutions should ensure that all relevant internal information with respect 
to the creditworthiness of an obligor is taken into account and the rating is 
updated with new information in a timely manner. 
(e) Each institution should remain responsible for the performance of the 
rating model on its own portfolio. 



45. To ensure that its ratings systems are operating properly on an ongoing basis, if 
an institution introduces systematic adjustments to the outputs of the pool 
model, the institution concerned should initiate internal procedures to analyse 
whether significant weaknesses in the model exist and whether a model change 
needs to be triggered. 


3.6 Use of human judgement 


46. In accordance with Article 
171(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions must have specific 
definitions, processes and criteria for assigning exposures to grades or pools. 
The grade and pool definitions must be sufficiently detailed. To comply with this 
provision, institutions should ensure that, when human judgement is used in the 
assignment of exposures to grades or pools, there is a framework in place that 
establishes clear and detailed guidelines and procedures on the application of 
human judgement (e.g. 
through the use of pre-defined questionnaires). The use 



of human judgement should be documented in a way that ensures the rating 
assignment can be understood and replicated by a third party.28 To ensure the 
replicability and consistency of the rating assignment process, the principles set 
out below should be followed. 
(a) The basic structure of the model29 should be applied consistently and not 
modified by human judgement. It should, in particular, consist of: 
(i) the minimum data sources to be used for the grade/pool assignment; 
(ii) the complete list of pre-defined risk drivers which need to be 
assessed individually and for which the assessments need to be 
stored; 
(iii) the importance of and the evaluation criteria for the risk drivers, 
particularly the functional relationship30 between risk drivers and the 
assigned rating (before overrides); 
(iv) the procedures and steps to be followed during the assessment, 
including the steps where overrides can be applied. 



(b) Institutions should assess the consistency of the rating assignment 
process. To this end, they should define the tests and analyses in a way 
that is proportionate to the degree of human judgement applied. In cases 
where human judgement is the main component of the rating assignment 
process, these tests should at least include an analysis of consistency in a 
representative sample by having obligors re-rated independently by 
different analysts. The results of the ratings consistency assessment 
should be analysed against pre-defined thresholds as part of the 
framework for review of estimates. 



47. In accordance with Article 
172(3) of the CRR, for grade and pool assignments 
institutions must document the situations in which human judgement may 
override the inputs or outputs of the assignment process and the personnel 
responsible for approving these overrides. In the context of this requirement, 
the ECB understands that an override is a judgement-based and discretionary 
action that contributes to the assessment of the obligor’s creditworthiness as 
obtained through pre-defined components of the rating system. These comprise 
both automatic/quantitative components31 and qualitative variables32. An 
override constitutes a direct intervention to an input or to an intermediate33 or 


28 
Article 
171(1)(b) of the CRR. 


29 
This concept is not intended to refer to pure statistical models and can encompass other methods for 
assigning exposures to grades or pools. 


30 
This refers to a relationship between different variables in order to form an output (and not necessarily 
a mathematical formula). 


31 
These components also include the “forcing rules”, i.e. 
automatic adjustments to the rating carried out 
when certain conditions apply (e.g. 
more than 30 days past due). 


32 
As referred to in paragraph 
201(a) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 


33 
Intermediate outputs should be defined in the model specifications (e.g. 
results of the financial 
scorecard of a model). 



final output of the rating assignment process, through an adjustment or 
replacement of that input or intermediate/final output which is obtained under 
the regular assignment process. Overrides should be limited to information 
relevant to the obligor’s creditworthiness, if this is not captured well by the pre-
defined components of the model.34 
48. Within a rating assignment process, the use of pre-defined risk drivers in the 
form of qualitative model inputs should be distinguished from overrides. These 
judgement-based or qualitative variables are expected to be considered under 
the regular assignment process and as part of the pre-defined components of 
the rating system. Therefore, they are not themselves considered as 
overrides.35 
49. Whenever the functional relationship between the risk drivers and the assigned 
rating as specified in paragraph 
46(a)(iii) is circumvented, for example in cases 
where the last-assigned rating deviates from the rating that would be assigned 
on the basis of this functional relationship, it is considered to be an override. For 
the purposes of Article 
172(3) of the CRR, it should therefore be specified in the 
policies and criteria for the use of overrides in the rating assignment process. 
50. In accordance with Article 
174(e) of the CRR, the results of the statistical model 
must be complemented by human judgement, especially by taking into account 
all information not included in the model. The higher the number of relevant 
observations, the more the institution should rely on the outcomes of the 
statistical model. 
51. In addition, when human judgement is used for the purpose of model 
development, for example in setting the model’s assumptions, the identification 
of risk drivers and determination of their weights, or the identification and 
combination of model components, there is a risk of the model-based 
assignments being inaccurate.36 To mitigate this risk, institutions should ensure 
that the incorporation of human judgement is appropriately managed and 
proportionate to the number of relevant available observations. 
52. For the purposes of quantifying the risk parameters to be associated with 
grades or pools, estimates must not be based purely on judgemental 
considerations.37 To this end, where human judgement is used to a greater 
extent because of the low number of relevant available observations, 
institutions should apply a higher MoC to their estimates to account for 
additional uncertainty. 


34 
This also applies to climate-related and environmental risks. Where climate-related and environmental 
risk drivers are assessed to be relevant and material and the rating system does not include 
information related to these risk drivers, institutions should consider whether it would be appropriate to 
take a more conservative approach in the assignment of ratings to the related facilities or obligors by 
applying an override to the final output of the rating assignment process. 


35 
However, these qualitative input variables can be subject to overrides in accordance with 
paragraph 
201(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 


36 
Article 
174(e) of the CRR. 


37 
Article 
179(1)(a) of the CRR. 



53. In addition, whenever human judgement is used in the estimation of risk 
parameters (for either risk differentiation or risk quantification purposes) 
institutions are expected to have in place a framework under paragraph 
35 of 
the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 


3.7 Use of data in the case of consolidations 


54. Consolidations, i.e. mergers and acquisitions, frequently lead to the acquirer’s 
IRB models being extended to the target’s portfolios. In such cases, the ECB 
understands that the combined default and loss histories of the acquirer and the 
target should be used to calibrate the IRB models following the extension.38 
55. In particular, for loss data, where the acquiring bank’s workout processes are 
different from those of the acquired bank, the acquiring bank should apply 
paragraphs 33 and 38 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. However, in line 
with paragraph 163 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that the defaults relating to the acquired bank’s portfolio should 
not be excluded. 
56. Where the acquirer does not automatically have the legal right to access the 
default and loss histories of the acquired portfolios (e.g. in the case of a 
portfolio acquisition), the acquirer should nevertheless make reasonable efforts 
to acquire these data. 
57. Where the acquirer has not been able to access the default and loss histories of 
the acquired portfolios or where the default and loss histories are limited in 
scope, length or quality, and where the acquirer cannot prove that the inability 
to access this data does not lead to bias, the acquirer should consider this as a 
data deficiency and apply an appropriate adjustment and MoC accordingly. 


38 
Where the acquirer can show – by back-testing best estimates of risk parameters (excluding the MoC 
and downturn adjustment where applicable) in a way that includes the historical data of the target – that 
the risk parameters are still conservative, an immediate recalibration is not required. However, when 
checking whether the inclusion of recent data would have an impact on the calibration as part of the 
regular review of estimates, the historical and recent data of the target should be included in the 
analysis. Likewise, any further calibrations should be based on all data. 



4 Definition of default 


4.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 11 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

178 

(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 

12/03/2014 

4 

 

Annex I, Part II, 
Section 1(3) 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No2022/439 

20/10/2021 

26, 27, 28, 29 

 

ECB Regulation on discretion on materiality 
threshold39 

26/11/2018 

3 

 

Corrigendum to the ECB Regulation on discretion on 
materiality threshold40 

08/07/2020 

 

 

ECB Regulation on options and discretions41 

24/03/2016 

4 

 

EBA Guidelines on DoD42 

28/09/2016 

 

16-114 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

23, 34, 36, 37, 38 

EBA Guidelines on SRT43 

07/07/2014 

 

 



39 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1845 of the European Central Bank of 21 November 2018 on the exercise of the 
discretion under Article 178(2)(d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 in relation to the threshold for 
assessing the materiality of credit obligations past due (ECB/2018/26) (OJ L 299, 26.11.2018, p. 55), 
referred to in this guide as the “ECB Regulation on discretion on materiality threshold”. 


40 
Corrigendum to Regulation (EU) 2018/1845 of the European Central Bank of 21 November 2018 on the 
exercise of the discretion under Article 178(2)(d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 in relation to the 
threshold for assessing the materiality of credit obligations past due (ECB/2018/26) (Official Journal of 
the European Union L 299 of 26 November 2018) (OJ L 217 08.07.2020, p. 8), referred to in this guide 
as the “Corrigendum to the ECB Regulation on discretion on materiality threshold”. 


41 
Regulation (EU) 2016/445 of the European Central Bank of 14 March 2016 on the exercise of options 
and discretions available in Union law (ECB/2016/4) (OJ L 78, 24.3.2016, p. 60), referred to in this 
guide as the “ECB Regulation on options and discretions”. 


42 
EBA Guidelines on the application of the definition of default under Article 178 of Regulation (EU) No 
575/2013 (EBA/GL/2016/07), referred to in this guide as the “EBA Guidelines on DoD”. 


43 
EBA Guidelines on Significant Credit Risk Transfer relating to Articles 243 and Article 244 of Regulation 
575/2013 (EBA/GL/2014/05), referred to in this guide as the “EBA Guidelines on SRT”. 


 


58. Article 178(1) of the CRR gives a definition of default to be considered for risk 
quantification under the IRB approach. 
59. According to Article 178(1) and (2)(d) of the CRR in conjunction with Article 3 of 
the ECB Regulation on discretion on materiality threshold and Article 4 of the 
ECB Regulation on options and discretions, a default must be considered to 
have occurred with regard to a particular obligor when either or both of the 
following have taken place: 
(a) the institution considers that the obligor is unlikely to pay its credit 
obligations to the institution, the parent undertaking or any of its 
subsidiaries in full, without recourse by the institution to actions such as 
realising security (“unlikeness to pay” criterion); 






(b) the obligor is more than 90 consecutive days past due on any material 
credit obligation to the institution, the parent undertaking or any of its 
subsidiaries (“days past due” criterion), considering that a credit obligation 
past due is material when it: 
(i) exceeds €100 if it is a retail exposure or €500 if it is an exposure 
other than retail exposure; and 
(ii) represents more than 1% of the total amount of all on-balance sheet 
exposures to that obligor for the credit institution, the parent 
undertaking or any of its subsidiaries, excluding equity exposures. 








4.2 Consistency of the application 


60. Where the definition of default is applied at obligor level, both the days past due 
criterion and the unlikeness to pay criterion must be assessed with regard to all 
exposures of an obligor to the institution, the parent undertaking or any of its 
subsidiaries. This implies that, for a banking group, all information about the 
different exposures and the behaviour of the obligor across the banking group 
must be consolidated. This also applies in cases where the definition of default 
is applied at the level of an individual credit facility for those subsets of 
indications of unlikeness to pay that are related to the condition of the obligor 
rather than the status of a particular exposure e.g. bankruptcy status. A certain 
degree of leeway is granted with regard to the implementation of this group-
wide view in identifying defaults, as described in paragraphs 81 and 82 of the 
EBA Guidelines on DoD. 
61. Paragraph 82 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD acknowledges that mechanisms or 
procedures for the consistent identification of the default of an obligor need not 
be applied if it is too burdensome for institutions to verify the status of a client in 
all legal entities and at all geographical locations within the group. In such a 
case, institutions may not perform the check for consistency if they can 
demonstrate that the effect of non-compliance is immaterial because there are 
no or a very limited number of common clients among the relevant entities 
within a group and the exposure to these clients is immaterial. With a view to 
operationalising paragraph 82 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, the ECB 
understands that it is best practice for the institution to have a regular process 
for monitoring common obligors so as to ensure on a regular basis that the 
conditions set out in paragraph 82 (continue to) apply. As a minimum, it is the 
ECB’s understanding that the following points should be documented in the 
internal policies of the institution regarding this monitoring process: 
(a) all assumptions made for the purpose of the regular analysis of common 
obligors should be clearly stated (in particular for the correct identification 
of common obligors across legal entities or geographies); 






(b) the levels of the thresholds according to which the number of common 
obligors is deemed very limited and their exposure is deemed immaterial 
should be clearly stated, justified (at least qualitatively) and reasonable; 
(c) the actions to be taken when the aforementioned thresholds are breached 
should be clearly described; 
(d) the frequency of the monitoring process should be commensurate with the 
share of common obligors evaluated in both numbers and exposures, and 
in all cases should be no less than annual. 





62. The materiality thresholds for the purpose of the definition of default applied by 
an institution outside the SSM area and a parent significant institution may be 
different, even if both belong to the same banking group, because a materiality 
threshold which differs from the one set by the ECB may apply under national 
law outside the SSM area. This scenario is one of those addressed by 
paragraphs 83 to 85 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. If an obligor has exposures 
under both SSM and non-SSM jurisdictions, institutions should check both the 
ECB materiality threshold and the materiality threshold (if any) applicable in the 
other jurisdiction. The default will be triggered in the jurisdiction where the 
materiality threshold is first exceeded for 90 consecutive days, and institutions 
are then expected to apply additional unlikely to pay triggers, making use of the 
provisions set out in paragraph 58 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, to achieve a 
consistent default status across all jurisdictions. 
63. Paragraphs 95 to 105 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD clarify the treatment of 
joint credit obligations when the definition of default is applied at obligor level for 
retail exposures. In the ECB’s understanding, it is best practice for institutions to 
foster consistency within the process related to the default identification by also 
applying these requirements to joint credit obligations44 involving non-retail 
exposures. 
64. Institutions should distinguish the concept of joint credit obligation from the 
concept of exposure secured by another individual or entity. In the latter case, if 
the guarantor has to step in to make payments not made by the obligor, then 
the obligor should be classified as defaulted because it failed to repay the credit 
obligation without recourse by the institution to the guarantor. Instead, in the 
case of a joint credit obligation, the joint obligor should be treated as a different 
obligor from each of the individual obligors, and the fact that one individual 
obligor pays the joint obligation in full does not lead to the automatic 
classification of the other individual obligor as defaulted. From a risk 
quantification perspective, since the joint obligors should be counted as 
separate obligors, a default on a joint credit obligation should be counted 
separately from the default of individual obligors in the default time series. Since 
defaults on joint obligors and related individual obligors will be correlated to 
some extent, institutions should ensure this does not lead to biased results or 
wrong conclusions during the development or the validation of the PD model 


44 
As defined in paragraph 96 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. 



where one-year default rates are computed, particularly if this correlation 
implies a violation of the assumptions required by the underlying statistical 
methodologies (e.g. in the validation of model performance) under Article 
180(1)(d) of the CRR. 


4.3 Days past due criterion 


65. The days past due criterion applies to all exposures, irrespective of their related 
repayment scheme and features. If an obligor holds products envisaging small 
interest payments compared with the outstanding exposures (e.g. bullet loans 
or interest-only mortgages) and becomes past due, then several missed 
payments would be needed to exceed the relative component of the materiality 
threshold and eventually trigger the default according to the past due criterion. 
Institutions that wish to anticipate the default recognition for this type of product 
should define appropriate additional indications of unlikeness to pay. 
66. When the days past due criterion is met, institutions should classify the 
exposures to defaulted status without further ado. This means that at the onset 
of the 91st consecutive day after the materiality threshold is exceeded for the 
first time, the institution should activate the default flag for all affected 
exposures. Moreover, it is the ECB’s understanding that the days past due 
criterion is driven by the exact number of days in which material past due 
amounts are present. Therefore, proxies in which defaults are triggered, for 
example, after three months of missed payments or three missed monthly 
payments (“months in arrears” approach) are not considered an appropriate 
implementation of this criterion. 
67. The days past due criterion where the definition of default is applied at obligor 
level may, in some cases, lead to a default being identified despite no individual 
exposures being more than 90 consecutive days past due. This could happen, 
for instance, if an obligor repays some material past due exposures, but the 
number of days past due at obligor level keeps increasing – instead of being 
reset – because there are other material exposures that are just a few days 
past due at facility level. In that case, a default should be triggered when the 
counter at obligor level reaches 90 consecutive days, even if the remaining 
material exposures could be less than 90 consecutive days past due at facility 
level. However, in the specific case of factoring arrangements where the 
purchased receivables are recorded in the balance sheet of the institution, if the 
counter at obligor level reaches 90 but none of the receivables to the obligor is 
more than 30 consecutive days past due at facility level, then this should be 
recognised as a technical past due situation according to paragraph 23(d) of the 
EBA Guidelines on DoD and the default should not be triggered. In such a case, 
the counters at obligor and facility levels keep running (unless the obligor 
repays past due exposures) and default is triggered as soon as one receivable 
is more than 30 consecutive days past due. 



68. If the past due amounts cease to be material then the counting of days past due 
is reset and if the default trigger represented by the days past due criterion was 
active, it ceases to apply. Past due amounts may cease to be material as a 
result of repayments from the obligor but also in cases where the obligor has an 
exposure of up to €50,000 and switches from retail to non-retail classification45. 
69. The absolute component of the materiality threshold set in the ECB Regulation 
on discretion on materiality threshold is expressed in euro and therefore 
institutions should convert all the relevant amounts to euro when applying the 
materiality threshold. For this purpose, significant institutions should convert 
exposures to euro using the exchange rate quoted every day in order to count 
the number of days that the threshold is exceeded and determine the exact day 
when default is triggered. 
70. Institutions should recognise as a credit obligation past due any amount of 
principal, interest or fee that has not been paid at the date it was due in line with 
paragraph 16 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. Fees in this context include 
maintenance fees for deposit accounts that remain unpaid because the 
accounts are empty. Written-off amounts should not be considered in the 
calculation of the obligor's total and past due exposures when assessing the 
materiality threshold, but institutions should assess, whenever a write-off 
occurs, whether this qualifies as an indication of unlikeness to pay according to 
paragraphs 36 to 40 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. 
71. Paragraph 19 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD describes the situation where 
repayment is subject to a dispute between the obligor and the institution, while 
paragraph 20 describes the situation of a merger between two obligors. In 
particular, for disputes, it is up to the institution to decide whether counting is 
suspended and whether the suspension is followed by an assessment of 
indications of unlikeness to pay. By contrast, the institution should always verify 
the presence of indications of unlikeliness to pay in cases where a payment is 
suspended by law or the obligor exercises a contractual right to suspend the 
payment as set out in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. 
72. In line with paragraph 21 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, the calculation of the 
sum of all amounts past due should be performed with a frequency allowing 
timely identification of default. In any case, where the institution calculates days 
past due less often than daily, it should ensure that the date of default is 
identified as the date when the past due criterion has actually been fulfilled. In 
other words, the calculation of days past due can be performed less often than 
daily but it should then cover each day from the last calculation performed, in 
line with paragraph 106 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. In general, institutions 
should ensure that the calculations of both days past due and default amounts 


45 
The relative components of the materiality thresholds for retail and non-retail exposure are both 1%, 
while the absolute components are €100 and €500 respectively. This means that it is only for 
exposures up to €50,000, where the non-retail absolute component is dominant, that the shift from 
retail to non-retail may produce the reclassification of past due amounts from material to immaterial. 



are up to date whenever they are used to support all relevant processes, 
including internal and external reporting. 
73. Paragraph 23 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD specifies the definition and 
treatment of situations where the recognition of default results from technical 
issues. It is the ECB’s understanding that the technical issues referred to in 
point (a) of the same paragraph also include situations where the bank has 
approved a moratorium or restructuring for an obligor that is less than 90 days 
past due on material credit obligations but the resulting suspension or reset of 
days in the past due counter is applied in the systems with some delay when 
the counter has already reached 90 days. Any situation other than those 
described in paragraph 23 should not be classified as technical defaults. This 
includes, for instance, issues with payments resulting from errors in the data or 
systems of the obligor and disputes under paragraph 19 of the EBA Guidelines 
on DoD. With regard to the latter, it is the ECB’s understanding that treating 
disputes as technical past due situations, for instance because of the 
impossibility of suspending the counting of days past due in the systems, would 
lead to an unwarranted inflation of technical past due situations. 
74. The ECB has the following understanding of the application of the specific 
treatment set out in paragraphs 25 and 26 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD for 
exposures to central governments, local authorities and public sector entities. 
The specific treatment under paragraph 25 should be applied as soon as 
exposures have been materially past due for more than 90 consecutive days, 
and not before, but only where all conditions specified in paragraph 25 are met. 
The specific treatment implies that, in accordance with paragraph 26, these 
exposures are not treated as being defaulted and, from the time of the 
application of the specific treatment, those exposures have to be excluded from 
the calculation of the materiality threshold for all other exposures of the obligor. 
The exposures that are subject to the specific treatment need to be clearly 
documented. If, after the application of the specific treatment, the materiality 
threshold is still exceeded on account of other exposures past due which are 
not covered by the specific treatment, the obligor in question, and all of its 
exposures, are immediately regarded as having defaulted. 
75. The days past due criterion should be applied to factoring and purchased 
receivables, taking into consideration the specific provisions set out in 
paragraphs 27 to 32 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. Institutions should clearly 
specify in their policies the types of products offered to customers which are 
considered as factoring and purchased receivables. It is the ECB’s 
understanding that institutions may align their definitions to the indications of 
which products are considered to be factoring in Commission Implementing 
Regulation (EU) No 2021/451, where “trade receivables” are defined. 
76. Paragraph 34 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD sets out the condition under which 
institutions may add another trigger of unlikeness to pay in order to identify 
defaults on the basis of a lower materiality threshold than the one considered 
for the days past due criterion. It is the ECB’s understanding that, in this case, 



institutions should monitor this additional unlikeliness to pay trigger together 
with the days past due criterion in the same way as described in paragraph 62. 


4.4 Unlikeness to pay criterion 


77. For the purposes of determining unlikeliness to pay in connection with the sale 
of credit obligations (Article 178(3)(c) of the CRR), according to paragraphs 42 
and 43 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, institutions should analyse the reasons 
for the sale of credit obligations and the reasons for any losses recognised 
thereby. If, based on this analysis, the sale is recognised as credit-related, the 
institution should calculate the materiality of the loss according to the formula 
set out in paragraph 44 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD to verify whether a 
default is triggered. When applying the formula, the sale price should be used 
without any type of adjustment. It should be noted that sales of credit 
obligations in the context of traditional securitisations where there is a 
significant risk transfer according to Article 244 of the CRR and the EBA 
Guidelines on SRT are also considered sales of credit obligations for the 
purposes of this unlikeliness to pay criterion. 
78. [For the purposes of determining unlikeliness to pay in connection with a 
distressed restructuring (Article 178(3)(d) of the CRR),] in the formula defining 
the diminished financial obligation set out in paragraph 51 of the EBA 
Guidelines on DoD, NPV0 and NPV1 are the net present value of the expected 
cash flows, discounted using the customer’s original effective interest rate 
based on the old and the new arrangements respectively. Cash flows in this 
context are all payments the obligor is legally bound to perform under the 
contractual terms. Therefore, NPV0 and NPV1 should not reflect any expected 
loss due to default or prepayment. Any approximation of the original effective 
interest rate or treatment of variable rates that is used for accounting purposes 
should also be used in the calculation of NPV0 and NPV1 for the purpose of 
default identification. Where the obligor has accumulated late fees or interest 
rate penalties before the restructuring, the ECB’s understanding is as follows. 
(a) If late fees and interest rate penalties that originated from a violation of the 
original schedule of payments were forgiven, they should not be included 
in the NPV1 calculation since they are not part of the new contractual 
schedule of payments. 
(b) If late fees and interest rate penalties rates that originated from a violation 
of the original schedule of payments were not forgiven, they are 
consequently included in the obligor’s new schedule of payments following 
the distressed restructuring (possibly with a postponement), and the 
respective amounts should therefore be included in the NPV1 calculation. 
This also holds when the institution applies (generic) fees and higher rates 
in the obligor’s new schedule of payments as part of the distressed 
restructuring. 






(c) Late fees and interest rate penalties should not in any case be included in 
the NPV0 calculation as they were not explicitly included in the original 
contractual schedule of payments. 
(d) The NPV1 calculation assumes that payments duly respect the new 
schedule. Therefore, fees and penalties that would be triggered in case of 
violations of the (new) schedule should not be considered in NPV1. 





In addition, it is the ECB’s understanding that the calculation of the diminished 
financial obligation should only take into consideration expected cash flows. 
Cash flows having occurred in the past, for example the financed amount and 
past payments from the obligor, are not expected and should therefore not be 
considered. 


79. The calculation of the diminished financial obligation should be performed for all 
distressed restructurings in accordance with paragraph 52 of the EBA 
Guidelines on DoD when the distressed restructuring is agreed. Hence, the 
calculation should also be performed in cases where the threshold is blatantly 
exceeded, for example if a large part of the principal is forgiven. In this regard, it 
should be noted that – for institutions using own LGD estimates – the calculated 
diminished financial obligation is also relevant for deriving the economic loss 
caused by a default whenever institutions open new facilities to replace 
previously defaulted facilities as part of a restructuring or for technical reasons 
(see paragraph 153(b) of this chapter), and the amount by which the financial 
obligation has diminished is included among the information that the reference 
dataset for LGD estimation should contain (see paragraph 109(c) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD). If an institution applies a material change to its 
definition of default by reviewing the threshold for assessing the materiality of 
the diminished financial obligation, the reviewed threshold should be applied to 
distressed restructurings that occur after the modification of the threshold and 
does not affect previous restructurings. 
80. When applying paragraph 54 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, which requires 
that any concession extended to an obligor already in default should lead to the 
obligor being classified as a distressed restructuring, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that institutions should understand the term “concession” in the 
same sense as in Article 47b(1) of the CRR. 
81. When specifying in their internal policies and procedures other additional 
indications of unlikeliness to pay of an obligor, institutions should, in line with 
paragraph 58 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, define and document additional 
indications of unlikeness to pay that are appropriate for the specific type of 
exposure. It is the ECB’s understanding that considering only the indications of 
unlikeness to pay set out in points (a) to (f) of Article 178(3) of the CRR is in 
principle not deemed an appropriate and prudent approach. In order to define 
these additional indications, institutions may consider the list provided in 
paragraph 59 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. 



82. In line with paragraph 60 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, institutions are 
expected to take into account external information, if available, in their default 
identification process. In doing so, institutions are free to determine the 
frequency of the update and monitoring of the external information, possibly 
differentiating among individual subsets of obligors, provided that the frequency 
determined for each subset eventually guarantees the timely identification of 
default. 


4.5 Return to non-defaulted status 


83. Paragraphs 72 to 73 and 71 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD provide the 
minimum conditions for reclassification to non-defaulted status for exposures 
subject to distressed restructurings and for all other exposures respectively. In 
particular, for exposures subject to distressed restructurings the minimum 
probation period46 is generally longer than for exposures not subject to 
distressed restructuring. This implies the following. 
(a) If the definition of default is applied at obligor level, institutions should 
monitor the conditions for reclassification to non-defaulted status that are 
applicable to each exposure of the obligor, and the obligor may return to 
non-defaulted status only when all conditions are met for all exposures. 
(b) If the definition of default is applied at facility level, institutions should 
monitor the conditions for reclassification to non-defaulted status that are 
applicable to the facility, and when these are met then the facility may 
return to non-defaulted status. This means that different defaulted facilities 
belonging to the same obligor may possibly return to non-defaulted status 
at different moments in time. However, institutions may make use of the 
possibility of setting longer probation periods (as set out in paragraphs 71 
and 72 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD) to ultimately align these moments. 



84. In the case of exposures subject to distressed restructuring, one of the 
minimum conditions for the reclassification to non-defaulted status is that during 
the probation period a material payment has been made by the obligor. In this 
regard, paragraph 73(a) of the EBA Guidelines on DoD provides examples of 
material payments that should not be construed as mandatory conditions; 
institutions may define material payments otherwise. It is the ECB’s 
understanding that the appropriateness of such a definition is one of the 
elements that institutions should consider when monitoring the effectiveness of 
the policy for the return to non-default status as described in paragraphs 76 to 
78 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. 
85. Minimum conditions for returning to non-defaulted status with regard to past 
due amounts are different for exposures subject to distressed restructurings. 
These conditions are as follows. 


46 
The minimum probation period is the minimum period of time over which a defaulted exposure and 
related obligor should be monitored before the exposure may possibly return to non-defaulted status. 



(a) Where distressed restructuring does not apply to a defaulted exposure, if 
all other conditions described in paragraph 71 of the EBA Guidelines on 
DoD are met, a defaulted exposure can be reclassified to non-defaulted 
status even if there are still past due amounts that are either not material 
or material but are less than 90 consecutive days past due. 
(a) Where distressed restructuring does not apply to a defaulted exposure, the 
probation period should last a minimum of three months from the moment 
that all default triggers cease to apply. According to the ECB’s 
understanding, this means that if a new default trigger becomes applicable 
while the probation period is running, then the probation period is reset to 
zero and will start again when all default triggers, including the new one, 
will again cease to apply. 
(b) Where distressed restructuring applies to a defaulted exposure, the 
probation period should last a minimum of one year from the latest of 
these events: (i) the moment when the restructuring measures are 
extended; (ii) the moment when the exposure has been classified as 
defaulted; (iii) the end of the grace period included in the restructuring 
arrangements. According to the ECB’s understanding, this means that if a 
new default trigger becomes applicable while the probation period is 
running, then the probation period keeps running but the exposure still 
cannot return to non-defaulted status until the new trigger and all other 
triggers cease to apply. 



(b) Where distressed restructuring applies to a defaulted exposure, under 
paragraph 73 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD there should be no past due 
credit obligations according to the schedule applicable after the 
restructuring arrangements. Hence, it is the ECB’s understanding that 
institutions should refrain from allowing the return to non-default status as 
long as exposures are subject to outstanding past due amounts, even if 
these past due amounts are immaterial or are less than 90 days past due. 
This condition ensures alignment between defaulted exposures subject to 
distressed restructuring and forborne non-performing exposures (as also 
required by paragraph 107 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD). 


86. The activation of new default triggers for already defaulted exposures has a 
different impact on the probation period depending on whether the exposure is 
subject to distressed restructuring or not. This is explained as follows. 


4.6 Consistency of external data 


87. In accordance with Article 
178(4) of the CRR, institutions that, for the purpose of 
risk quantification, use external data that are not themselves consistent with the 
definition of default laid down in paragraph 1 of the same article must make 
appropriate adjustments to achieve broad equivalence. To comply with this 
requirement, institutions should ensure that when they make use of external 
data or pooled data they have a complete understanding of the definition of 



default applied to these data and demonstrate representativeness of data 
collected under a different definition of default in the same way as specified for 
external data in Chapter 6 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. In this context it is the 
ECB’s understanding that the following applies. 
(a) Where an institution demonstrates that the difference in definitions of 
default is negligible in terms of the impact on all risk parameters and own 
funds requirements in general, data based on a definition of default 
different from the one that is used internally for default identification may 
continue to be used in the risk quantification RDS without any adjustment. 
(b) Otherwise, institutions should perform appropriate adjustments to (i) the 
granular data used for risk quantification (as per paragraph 30 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD in conjunction with paragraph 68(b) of the EBA 
Guidelines on DoD) and/or (ii) aggregated metrics, model components or 
the risk estimates (as per paragraphs 34, 36, 37 and 38 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD). 





In addition, it is the ECB’s understanding that, all other things being equal, the 
use of external data for the purpose of risk quantification results in a higher 
level of estimation uncertainty than when using data collected under the 
definition of default that is used internally for default identification for the 
relevant type of exposure. Therefore, it would be in line with best practice for 
institutions to apply a category A MoC in accordance with paragraph 37(a)(viii) 
of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD when using external data for the 
purpose of risk quantification. 


88. For the purposes of model development, an RDS based on a definition of 
default different from the internal one may be acceptable under the conditions 
set out in paragraph 23 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD and as long as 
institutions provide reasonable assurance that the use of a different definition of 
default does not have a negative impact on the structure and performance of 
the rating model in terms of risk differentiation and predictive power with respect 
to the internal definition of default. 


4.7 Adjustments to risk estimates in the case of changes to the 
definition of default 


89. A change to the definition of default should be understood as any change to any 
aspect of the definition of default set out in Article 178 of the CRR, namely 
changes to the counting of days past due, changes to the indications of 
unlikeness to pay or changes to the criteria for allowing the return to non-
defaulted status of previously defaulted exposures. 



90. Under the IRB approach, changes to the definition of default require prior 
approval from the competent authority before they can be implemented.47 As a 
consequence, to avoid temporary mismatches in the definitions of default 
applied under the different approaches, it is advisable that institutions align the 
implementation timelines of changes for exposures under IRB and under SA so 
that changes are implemented for all exposures under IRB and under SA after 
the supervisory approval is granted for exposures treated under the IRB 
approach. 
91. Where a change has been made to the definition of default, institutions should 
demonstrate the model’s risk differentiation on a time series of realised default 
rates (or a time series of realised LGD or realised CCF) reflecting the new 
definition of default. Where institutions determine that their PD (or their LGD or 
CCF) models do not maintain good risk differentiation capacities with respect to 
the new definition of default, it is the ECB’s understanding that a recalibration is 
not sufficient to adjust the models to the new definition of default and, in 
addition to the recalibration, institutions should perform a full redevelopment48 
of their models. 
92. According to paragraph 11(b) of the EBA Guidelines on DoD and paragraph 30 
of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, where a change has been made to the 
definition of default, institutions should compare the new definition of default 
resulting from the change with the definitions underlying the observations 
included in the RDS used for risk quantification and assess the 
representativeness of such historical data in the same way as specified for 
external data in paragraph 87 of this chapter. It is the ECB’s understanding that 
one prerequisite for such a comparison is the construction of an appropriate 
dataset reflecting the new definition of default. Generally, to assemble a reliable 
dataset reflecting the new definition of default before changing their definition of 
default, institutions can adjust historical granular data collected on the basis of 
the old definition of default in order to achieve broad equivalence to the new 
definition of default by means of a parallel run (i.e. the implementation of the 
new definition of default in a parallel environment to the productive systems), a 
retrospective simulation (i.e. applying the new definition of default 
retrospectively to historical data) or a similar classification of data according to 
the new definition of default. Where the adjustments in granular data do not 
cover the entire historical observation period of the model, institutions may 
complement the missing periods by applying correction factors to aggregated 
metrics, model components or risk estimates, provided that the correction 
factors are based on an RDS that covers at least two years of data adjusted at 
granular level by means of a retrospective simulation, parallel run or similar 
classification of data according to the new definition of default. 


47 
As required by Article 4(1)(b) in conjunction with Annex I, Part II, Section 1(3) of Commission Delegated 
Regulation (EU) No 529/2014. 


48 
For rating systems based on a slotting approach under Article 153(5) of the CRR, institutions are 
expected to review and, if necessary, adjust the assignment to slots to reflect the new definition of 
default, although the risk parameters themselves are not affected. 



93. According to paragraphs 11(c) and 70 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, where a 
change has been made to the definition of default, institutions should add a 
definition of default-related MoC that is appropriate and sufficient to cover the 
uncertainty caused by deficiencies in the RDS used for risk quantification owing 
to the impossibility of performing appropriate adjustments, as well as by 
uncertainties related to the quantification of appropriate adjustments (at 
granular or aggregate level) to account for the change in the definition of default 
in the model’s risk quantification. Generally, it is the ECB’s understanding that 
estimation uncertainty also increases in the infrequent cases where institutions 
do not apply appropriate adjustments to account for the change in the definition 
of default because they estimate that the impact of the new definition of default 
on all risk parameters and own funds requirements is negligible. As a 
consequence, in these situations too, institutions should apply a definition of 
default-related MoC49. 


49 
In exceptional cases, institutions may set such a MoC to zero. For this to be permitted, the conclusion 
that the change in the definition of default will have a negligible impact must be based on an RDS that, 
for the entire historical observation period, faithfully replicates the new definition of default after the 
model change, without any use of simplifying assumptions or correction factors applied at aggregate 
level. It is the ECB’s understanding that, in such a situation, estimation uncertainty does not increase 
beyond what is already captured in the general estimation error. 



5 Probability of default 


5.1 Structure of PD models 


5.1.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 12 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

144 

(1)(a), (e) 

161 

(3) 

169 

(1), (2) 

170 


(1)(a) to (f), (2), (3)(a) 
to (c), (4) 

171 

(2) 

172 

(1)(a), (d) 

173 

(1)(b) 

174 

(1)(a), (c) 

179 

(1)(a) 

180 

(1)(a), (g), (2)(a) 

201, 202, 203, 236 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

24 

(3)(c) 

30 

(3)(c), (e) 

33 to 36, 38 

 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

20-27, 56-69, 96, 97, 
98(b) 



 


94. In accordance with Article 
179(1)(a) of the CRR, estimates must be based on 
the material drivers of the risk parameters.50 The relevant material risk drivers 
and rating criteria may be taken into consideration in several ways: 
(a) when assigning exposures to different PD models; 
(b) at a PD model level when assigning exposures to different ranking/scoring 
methods; 
(c) as explanatory variables in ranking/scoring methods; 
(d) as drivers when defining calibration segments by splitting exposures 
covered by the same PD model into subsets carrying a significantly 
different level of risk; 





50 
Institutions should consider all potential risk drivers in accordance with paragraph 57 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD. These include but are not limited to climate-related and environmental risk drivers 
affecting the PD, where relevant and material. 



(e) as drivers in the process for the assignment of facilities or obligors to 
grades or pools other than calibration segments. 


95. When choosing the risk drivers for the models, there is a risk that those drivers 
that capture the characteristics of defaulted obligors might be inappropriately 
understood as relevant risk drivers for the portfolio, or that an inappropriate 
weight might be given to some of them. To mitigate this risk, institutions should 
take appropriate measures against model misspecification with regard to 
overfitting. This is particularly relevant where default data for the development 
of the model are scarce. Where an institution relies on one or more statistical 
models to define the process of assigning exposures to grades or pools (or 
parts of this process) in accordance with Article 175(4)(b) of the CRR, it is the 
ECB’s understanding that for institutions to comply with the requirement, set out 
in Article 144(1)(a) of the CRR, that rating systems should provide for a 
meaningful differentiation of risk as further explained in letters (c) and (e) of 
Article 30(3) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439, the 
statistical process followed by the institution in selecting its model(s) should 
include assessing the performance of the model(s) on the basis of independent 
datasets (data points which were left out of the model fitting) in a way that limits 
the risk of overfitting. Independent datasets should correspond not only to 
random sampling (out-of-sample), but also to different time periods (out-of-time) 
unless there are no sufficient data available for the training sample. The 
expectations set out above in this paragraph are specifically related to the 
model development phase. Once the process for assigning exposures to 
grades or pools has been defined, the requirements related to the framework 
for the review of estimates under paragraphs 217 to 221 of the EBA Guidelines 
on PD and LGD apply together with the expectations set out in Section 9 of this 
chapter. In particular, in accordance with paragraph 218(b)(i) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD, the institution must carry out an analysis to identify 
any potential deterioration in the model’s performance, including the model’s 
discriminatory power, by comparing its performance at the time of the 
development with its performance over each subsequent observation period. 
96. In accordance with Article 
144(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions’ rating systems 
must provide for a meaningful assessment of obligor and transaction 
characteristics, a meaningful differentiation of risk and accurate and consistent 
quantitative estimates of risk. To comply with this requirement, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that PD models should perform adequately on economically 
significant and material sub-ranges of application.51 The sub-ranges are 
identified by splitting the full range of application of the PD model into different 
parts on the basis of potential drivers for risk differentiation, including the 
following non-exhaustive list of drivers,52 where relevant: 


51 
Where an institution has approval for a PD model on a consolidated basis as well as on a sub-
consolidated and/or individual basis, it is the ECB’s understanding that this PD model should perform 
adequately at these sub-consolidated and/or individual levels, as these are considered material sub-
ranges of application. 


52 
When external credit bureau scores or ratings are used as the main (or one of the main) driver(s) of the 
internal rating, the set of all exposures for which the external score or rating is not available should also 
be considered a significant sub-range of application. 



(a) for PD models covering exposures to small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs): country, industry (e.g. 
statistical classification of economic 
activities in the European Community (abbreviated as NACE53) code 
section classification A to U), size of obligor (e.g. 
different buckets in terms 
of total assets), past delinquency (e.g. 
obligors with delinquency events, 
i.e. 
days past due, in the last 12 
months); 
(a) clearly describe its range of application (and sub-divisions into different 
ranking/scoring methods and calibration segments) and also include an 
explanation of the risk drivers which the institution considered when 
designing the process but has decided not to use for the assignment of the 
obligor to the rating system; 
(b) ensure that there are no overlaps in the range of application of different PD 
models and that each obligor or facility to which the IRB approach should 
be applied can be clearly assigned to one particular PD model. 



(b) for PD models covering retail exposures: client type (e.g. 
high net 
worth/private banking, other individuals, self-employed, SMEs), product 
type (e.g. 
consumer credit, credit card, other), region (e.g. 
nomenclature of 
territorial units for statistics (NUTS) 1, 2 or 3 as defined by Eurostat), past 
delinquency (e.g. 
obligors with delinquency events, i.e. 
days past due, in 
the last 12 
months), maturity (e.g. 
original or remaining maturity); 
(c) for PD models covering retail exposures secured by real estate: region 
(e.g. 
NUTS 1, 2 or 3 as defined by Eurostat), type of real estate 
(e.g. 
residential, commercial, other), past delinquency (e.g. 
obligors with 
delinquency events, i.e. 
days past due, in the last 12 
months), maturity 
(e.g. 
original or remaining maturity); 
(d) for PD models covering exposures to financial institutions: business model 
(deposit-taking institutions, investment banking, insurance firms, other), 
jurisdiction (or global region as appropriate) and size (defined buckets of 
total assets); 
(e) for PD models covering exposures to large corporates: industry 
(e.g. 
NACE code section classification A to U), country (or global region as 
appropriate) and size (defined buckets of total turnover). 


97. In accordance with Article 
169(1) of the CRR, where an institution uses multiple 
rating systems, the rationale for assigning an obligor or a transaction to a rating 
system must be documented and applied in a manner that appropriately reflects 
the level of risk. To comply with this requirement institutions should, in terms of 
the range of application of a PD model: 


53 
Nomenclature statistique des activités économiques dans la Communauté Européenne. 



5.1.2 Risk differentiation 


Principles for all model types 


98. Article 
170 of the CRR lays down requirements related to the structure of rating 
systems. To comply with these requirements and with reference to Articles 
34 to 
36 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439, institutions should, 
among other things, ensure a meaningful differentiation of risk over time which 
takes into account (i) 
the distribution of obligors or facilities; (ii) 
the homogeneity 
of obligors or facilities assigned to the same grade or pool; and (iii) 
the different 
levels of risk across obligors or facilities assigned to different grades or pools to 
which a different PD is applied. 
99. To ensure that the PD model performs adequately in terms of risk 
differentiation, institutions should adopt the following approach. 
(a) Define metrics (considering both their evolution over time and specific 
reference dates) with well-specified targets, taking into account tolerance 
levels that reflect the uncertainty of the metrics, and take action, where 
necessary, to rectify any deviations from these targets that exceed the 
tolerance levels. Separate targets and tolerances may be defined for initial 
development and ongoing performance. 
(b) Ensure that the tools used to assess risk differentiation are sound and 
adequate considering the available data. The risk differentiation is 
expected to be demonstrated on time series of realised default rates for 
grades or pools under different economic conditions. 





Principles specific for grades and pools 


100. A grade or pool is understood by the ECB to be the subset of obligors or 
facilities to which the same PD is applied for the calculation of regulatory capital 
requirements, irrespective of how this PD has been assigned (e.g. 
through the 
use of masterscales). 


Distribution of obligors or facilities across grades or pools 


101. Articles 
170(1)(c) and (d) and 170(3)(b) and (c) of the CRR require, among 
other things, that the number of grades and pools is adequate to achieve 
meaningful risk differentiation and quantification of the PD at the grade or pool 
level. To comply with this requirement, institutions should: 
(a) justify the criteria applied when determining the number of grades or pools 
and the proportion of obligors or facilities assigned to each; 






(b) ensure that the concentration of numbers of obligors or facilities is not 
excessive in any grade or pool; any significant concentrations should be 
supported by convincing empirical evidence of the homogeneity of risk for 
those obligors or facilities; 
(c) ensure that no grade or pool has too few obligors or facilities, unless this is 
supported by convincing empirical evidence of the adequacy of the 
grouping of the exposures in question. 





Homogeneity within grades 


102. Articles 
170(1)(b) and (d) and 170(3)(b) and (c) of the CRR require, among 
other things, that the structure of rating systems must ensure the homogeneity 
of obligors or facilities assigned to the same grade or pool. In accordance with 
this requirement and under paragraph 
69 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and 
LGD: 
(a) homogeneity is understood as obligors or facilities assigned to a grade 
having a reasonably similar default risk to ensure that the grade-level 
default rate is representative of all obligors or facilities in that grade; 
(b) in cases where it is found (through the use of additional drivers or a 
different discretisation of the existing ones) that a material subset of 
obligors or facilities within a grade/pool yields a significantly different 
default rate to that of the rest of the grade or pool, this is considered to 
indicate a lack of homogeneity. 





Risk differentiation across grades or pools 


103. To comply with the requirement to ensure adequate risk differentiation across 
grades or pools,54 institutions should ensure that there are no significant 
overlaps in the distribution of the default risk between grades or pools. This 
should be ensured through a meaningful differentiation of the default rates of 
each grade. In particular, the ECB expects that a very granular rating scale55 
will only be used in cases where the institution is able to empirically confirm the 
risk differentiation across grades as described in this paragraph. 


54 
As required by Articles 
170(1)(b) and (d) and 170(3)(b) and (c) of the CRR. 


55 
For continuous models, see paragraph 141. 


Principles specific for direct estimates 


104. See paragraph 
141. 



5.1.3 Grade assignment dynamics 


105. In order to ensure a meaningful assessment of obligor characteristics,56 when 
assigning obligors or facilities to a grade or pool institutions should follow 
paragraphs 
66 to 68 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. Although the time 
horizon used in PD estimation is one year, it is the ECB’s understanding that 
the rating/grade/pool assignment process should also adequately anticipate and 
reflect risk over a longer time horizon and take into account plausible changes 
in economic conditions. In order to achieve this objective: 
(a) all relevant information should be included in the rating/grade/pool 
assignment process, giving an appropriate balance between drivers that 
are predictive only over a short time horizon and drivers that are predictive 
over a longer time horizon; 
(b) a horizon of two to three years is considered to be appropriate for most 
portfolios; 
(c) in accounting for plausible changes in economic conditions, the institution 
should consider at least past observed default patterns; 
(d) the model should perform under different economic conditions. 





56 
Article 
144(1)(a) of the CRR. 


As a consequence of the above, institutions’ grade assignment dynamics 
should also adequately anticipate and reflect in the assignment of grades the 
risk over the longer time horizon. For clarity, this does not mean that grades 
remain stable over the longer time horizon in the event of changes in the risks 
that are specific to the obligor. 


106. Additionally, the following principles apply under the specific situations 
considered in (a) to (c) below: 
(a) when using external scores or ratings (e.g. 
from an external bureau or 
external rating agency) as drivers for the purpose of risk differentiation 
within a specific model, institutions should identify the grade assignment 
dynamics embedded in the external rating and understand the effect on 
their own grade assignment dynamics, considering the other risk drivers 
used; 
(b) when using external ratings as target variables for the purpose of risk 
differentiation within a specific model (see Section 
5.1.5), institutions 
should preserve their own grade assignment dynamics by taking the 
appropriate measures when necessary; 
(c) when mapping internal grades to external grades in order to use external 
default rates to estimate PD, institutions should ensure that the grade 
assignment dynamics of the external ratings are sufficiently similar to their 






own internal grade assignment dynamics, or perform the necessary 
adjustments during risk quantification to compensate for any differences. 





5.1.4 Use of ratings of third parties 


107. In accordance with Article 
172(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions must assign each 
obligor to a grade or pool as part of the credit approval process. To comply with 
this requirement, in accordance with paragraph 62 of the EBA Guidelines on PD 
and LGD, institutions should have clear policies specifying the conditions under 
which the rating of a third party which has a contractual or organisational 
relationship with an obligor of the institution (third-party support) may be taken 
into account in the risk assessment of that obligor. These policies should meet 
the following criteria. 
(a) They should specify in which situations the rating of a parent entity could 
be taken into account in the risk assessment of other entities of the group. 
In particular, the policies should specify those situations in which obligors 
are assigned to a better grade than their parent entities. 
(b) They should include provisions on the use of ratings of third parties that 
provide contractual support to more than one obligor. As a general rule, 
the policies should include, but not be limited to, possible prioritisation, 
eligibility, and the impact on the rating of the supporting third party. 



108. It is the ECB’s understanding that a “rating transfer” within the meaning of 
paragraph 62(a) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD constitutes a 
mechanism that is distinct from the substitution effect referred to in Article 236 
of the CRR. In addition, according to the ECB’s interpretation, an “appropriate 
guarantee” within the meaning of paragraph 62(a) of the EBA Guidelines on PD 
and LGD should not be understood as credit risk mitigation within the meaning 
of Article 4(1)(57) of the CRR, but as a contractual agreement between the 
institution’s obligor and the third party, fully covering the obligor by providing the 
obligor with a claim against the third party that is effective (i.e. it prevents the 
default) and enforceable (from a legal perspective) before the institution has to 
recognise a default event of the obligor. When, under paragraph 62(a) of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, an institution performs a rating transfer across 
different rating systems that do not share the same obligor rating scale, it 
should ensure that the mapping between rating scales is performed in such a 
way that the final PD estimate (including MoC) assigned to the guaranteed 
exposure amount is not better than the final PD estimate (including MoC) being 
transferred from a third party. Article 171(2) of the CRR establishes that 
information used to assign obligors and facilities to grades or pools must be 
current. To comply with this requirement, if a material proportion of exposures or 
obligors within a rating system receives a rating from another IRB rating system 
as a result of rating transfers, institutions should ensure that the transferred 
ratings are automatically updated when the rating of the third party changes or 



when the PDs of the rating system to which the third party belongs are re-
estimated. 
109. In the situation described in paragraph 62(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and 
LGD, where a rating of a third party is being taken into account as an indication 
for an override of the assignment of the relevant obligor to a grade or pool, 
institutions should not assign a rating to an obligor that is better than the rating 
of the third party as a consequence of an override resulting solely from the 
existence of this third-party support. Furthermore, when third-party support is 
used extensively in the scope of application of a PD model as an indication for 
an override, institutions should consider its existence as a potential relevant 
driver for risk differentiation, in accordance with Section 5.1.2 of this chapter. 
110. The ECB understands paragraph 62(c) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 
to be applicable not only in the presence of contractual support, but also in 
instances where there is an organisational relationship between the third party 
and the obligor. In accordance with Article 179(1)(a) of the CRR, estimates must 
be plausible and intuitive and must be based on the material drivers of the 
respective risk parameters. To comply with this requirement when the treatment 
specified in paragraph 62(c) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD is used, 
institutions should have sufficient empirical evidence to justify situations where 
an obligor has an equal or better PD estimate than the third party providing 
support. 
111. In addition, differences between the various forms of contractual support should 
be considered in the PD models unless there is sufficient empirical evidence 
that these differences are not relevant risk drivers. This understanding should 
also be taken into account if the rating of the third party is being considered as 
an indication for an override under paragraph 62(b) of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD. 
112. Articles 
201 to 203 of the CRR establish requirements for the eligibility of 
unfunded credit protection. To comply with these requirements, institutions may 
recognise the guarantee by applying the risk weight of the guarantor under the 
standardised approach to the covered part of the exposure, provided that no 
own estimates of LGD and CCFs are used (foundation IRB (F-IRB)). This 
applies when an obligor is guaranteed by a third party that is not in the range of 
application of a PD model and the guarantee fulfils all requirements for credit 
risk mitigation (CRM), consistently with paragraph 
44 of the EBA Report on the 
CRM Framework. In such situations, under paragraph 
74 of the EBA Guidelines 
on PD and LGD, the guaranteed obligor should be included in the calculation of 
the one-year default rate of the grade the obligor is assigned to, before the 
recognition of the guarantee. 



113. In addition, when the institution reflects substitution effects57 arising from CRM 
in the ratings assigned to a material number of exposures within a rating 
system, there is a risk that the process of assigning exposures to grades or 
pools might not provide for a meaningful differentiation of risk, as a result of the 
inclusion of obligors with significantly different risk levels within the same rating 
grade.58 To mitigate this risk, institutions should verify that obligors guaranteed 
by a third party do not carry a significantly different level of risk from those in the 
same rating grade without such a guarantee, and that no separate calibration 
segment as referred to in paragraph 
97 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 
is required. 


57 
Substitution effects are understood as: the application of the treatment set out in Article 
236 of the CRR 
(i.e. 
the possibility to replace the PD of the obligor with the PD of the protection provider, or with a PD 
between that of the borrower and that of the guarantor); or the recognition of a guarantee by applying 
the risk weight of the guarantor under the standardised approach to the covered part of the exposure, 
as described in paragraph 
112 of this chapter. 


58 
In accordance with Article 
170(3)(c) of the CRR, the process of assigning exposures to grades or pools 
must provide for a meaningful differentiation of risk, for a grouping of sufficiently homogenous 
exposures, and must allow for accurate and consistent estimation of loss characteristics at grade or 
pool level. 


59 
Article 
169(2) of the CRR. 


5.1.5 Use of shadow rating models 


114. The ECB understands a shadow rating model (SRM) to be an internal rating 
approach that selects and weighs the risk drivers to be used for risk 
differentiation purposes by identifying the main factors that explain external 
ratings provided by an external credit assessment institution or similar 
organisation, rather than internal directly observed defaults. 
115. In accordance with Article 
144(1)(e) of the CRR, institutions must document the 
rationale for their rating systems. To comply with this requirement, institutions 
should justify and document the rationale for the use (and the continued use) of 
the SRM, instead of the internal default prediction model, and also document 
the alternative approaches that have been considered, in accordance with 
Article 
38 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439. In addition, 
and without prejudice to the risk differentiation requirements, when developing 
the model institutions should set explicit threshold criteria in terms of capacity to 
explain the target ratings and take appropriate action when those thresholds are 
not met. 
116. Assignment criteria and processes must be periodically reviewed to determine 
whether they remain appropriate for the current portfolio and external 
conditions.59 To comply with this requirement, as part of the review of estimates 
institutions should take all reasonable steps to demonstrate how the model 
performs on the application population in terms of predicting defaults or, if that 
is not possible (when there are not enough internal default data), at least in 
terms of predicting the target ratings. 



117. In accordance with Article 
170(1)(b) of the CRR, institutions’ rating systems 
must have an obligor rating scale which reflects exclusively the quantification of 
the risk of obligor default. To this end, institutions should adjust the ratings used 
as targets for their SRMs if they do not solely embed default risk. They should 
also document such adjustments. 
118. In accordance with Article 
174(1)(a) of the CRR, when an institution uses a 
statistical model and other mechanical methods to assign exposures to obligors 
or facilities, the input variables must form a reasonable and effective basis for 
the resulting predictions. To comply with this requirement, when the institution 
uses an SRM external ratings should not be used as risk drivers in addition to 
target variables. 
119. When assigning obligors and facilities to grades or pools institutions must take 
all relevant information into account.60 To comply with this requirement, when 
different information sources are used institutions should ensure that they 
understand the impact of any differences between these sources and establish 
adequate procedures to ensure that these differences are adequately 
addressed. 
120. Furthermore, the data used to build the model must be representative of the 
population of the institution's actual obligors or exposures.61 To comply with this 
requirement, institutions should analyse and provide evidence of the 
representativeness of the data used for model development consistently with 
paragraphs 
20 to 27 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 


60 
Article 
171(2) of the CRR. 


61 
Article 
174(c) of the CRR. 



5.2 PD risk quantification 


5.2.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 13 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

4 

(1)(78) 

144 

(1)(a) 

169 

(3) 

170 

(1)(b) 

179 

(1)(b) 

180 

(1)(a), (f), (h), (2)(a), (e) 

185 

(b) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
2022/439 

20/10/2021 

45, 46 

 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

70-99 



 


121. In accordance with Article 
180(1) of the CRR, for exposures to corporates, 
institutions, central governments and central banks and for equity exposures, 
institutions must estimate PDs by obligor grade from the LRA of one-year 
default rates. In accordance with Article 
180(2) of the CRR, for retail exposures, 
institutions must estimate PDs by obligor/facility grade or pool from LRAs of 
one-year default rates. To comply with these requirements, institutions should 
follow Sections 
5.2.2 to 5.2.6 below. 


5.2.2 Calculation of the one-year default rate and observed average 
default rates 


122. For the calculation of the one-year default rate and observed average default 
rates, institutions should follow paragraphs 
73 to 81 of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD, also considering the following. 
(a) It is the ECB’s understanding that, for retail exposures and when the 
definition of default is applied at facility level, paragraphs 
73 to 81 of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD can be applied at facility level. 
(b) It is the ECB’s understanding that, whenever the definition of default is 
applied at obligor level, a joint obligor62 should be considered as a 
separate obligor and the default on a joint credit obligation should be 
counted separately from the default of individual obligors. Consequently, a 





62 
In accordance with paragraph 104 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD, “joint obligor” means a specific set of 
individual obligors that have a joint obligation towards an institution. 



specific rating/PD should be assigned to the joint obligor and should be 
counted separately for the default rate and RWA calculation. 
(c) Exposures for which there is no commitment (considering on-balance 
sheet exposures, off-balance sheet items and unadvised limits) at 
reference date should be excluded from the calculation of the default rate. 
Conversely, if there is an EAD estimate, then these exposures should be 
included in the calculation of the default rate. 
(d) To calculate the one-year default rate in accordance with paragraph 73 of 
the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, it is the ECB’s understanding that 
each obligor – or each facility in cases where point (a) above applies – 
should be counted as one in the denominator and, if relevant, in the 
numerator of the one-year default rate calculation, even where the obligor 
– or the facility in cases where point (a) above applies – cannot be 
observed for the entire one-year observation period. 
(e) It is the ECB’s understanding that the existence of obligors – or the 
existence of facilities in cases where point (a) above applies – that cease 
to exist during the one-year observation period is not an issue in the 
calculation of the one-year default rate per se, and therefore no 
appropriate adjustment or deviation from the one-year default rate 
calculation method as described in point (d) above applies on the basis of 
their mere existence. This is without prejudice to appropriate adjustments 
and/or MoC following any identification of deficiencies in data 
representativeness as described in paragraphs 28 to 33 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD and in line with paragraph 34 and Section 4.4 
of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
(f) Under paragraph 76 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions 
should analyse whether (i) the migrations to a different rating grade, pool 
or rating model, rating system or approach to calculation of capital 
requirements within the observation period, or (ii) sales of credit 
obligations during the observation period bias the default rate. To this end, 
institutions should do both of the following. 
(i) Ensure that obligors – or facilities in cases where point (a) above 
applies – are tracked after their migration to a different rating grade, 
pool, rating model, rating system or approach to calculation of capital 
requirements, and that any default identified during the one-year 
observation period, even if after the migration, is duly counted for the 
one-year default rate calculation. In the ECB’s understanding, the 
lack of such tracking is a data deficiency in the risk quantification that 
institutions need to address in line with paragraphs 36 to 52 of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
(ii) Analyse whether sales of credit obligations that occurred during the 
one-year observation period materially deviate from those that 
occurred for this portfolio during other observation periods of the 






(a) the proportion of short-term and terminated contracts and/or the respective 
distribution of default rates is not stable over time; 
(b) the observed average default rate using overlapping one-year time 
windows is significantly different from the observed average default rate 
using non-overlapping one-year time windows; 
(c) there is a significant variation between the observed average default rates 
calculated using non-overlapping one-year time windows on different 
reference calculation dates within a year. 



dataset used for risk quantification. In the ECB’s understanding, the 
occurrence of such sales of credit obligations during the one-year 
observation period is a source of increased uncertainty in the risk 
quantification that institutions need to address in line with paragraphs 
36 to 52 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 





123. For clarity, the above-mentioned requirements for the calculation of one-year 
default rates also apply in case of external data for PD quantification being used 
at a more aggregated level than obligor or facility level. Where aggregated 
external data of a rating agency or similar organisation are used, institutions 
must ensure that the default rate calculation is aligned to the applicable 
regulations. 
124. For the purpose of choosing an appropriate approach under paragraph 
80 of 
the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, it is the ECB’s understanding that 
overlapping one-year time windows should preferably be used when the 
analysis performed by the institution under paragraphs 
80(a), 80(b) and/or 80(d) 
of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD reveals any of the following: 
125. Institutions should estimate PDs taking their own internal data into 
consideration. In cases where institutions use external or pooled data series to 
complement their internal data for the purpose of PD estimation, the more 
internal default experience an institution has, the less importance it needs to 
give to external data. In addition, institutions should ensure that these external 
or pooled data series are representative in accordance with Section 
3.2 of this 
guide.63 To comply with the requirement for the data to be representative and 
as part of their representativeness analysis, institutions should also ensure that 
the observed average default rates from external data or from the external part 
of the pooled data are calculated separately from, and compared with, those 
based on internal data.64 This comparison should be made at the levels at 
which the observed average default rate is to be calculated.65 This means, in 
accordance with paragraph 
79 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, that the 
comparison should be made for each rating grade or pool and for the type of 


63 
See Article 
179(1)(d) of the CRR. 


64 
If the internal data constitute just a small fraction of the pooled data and are not considered material in 
relation to the pooled data, for the purposes of this analysis the institution may perform a separate 
calculation of the average observed default rates with pooled data and a comparison with those 
calculated based on internal data only. 


65 
Considering the maximum common period possible between the internal and external or pooled data. 



exposures covered by the relevant PD model, as well as for any relevant 
calibration segment. The direction and magnitude of the differences between 
these averages should be properly analysed and documented when calibrating 
the model, including the need and adequacy of the category A MoC considered 
with regard to paragraph 
37(a)(viii) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, and 
duly followed up in the review of estimates. The comparison analysis at the 
levels of the type of exposure and calibration segment should include an 
analysis of the extent to which differences at those levels can be explained by 
any difference in the distribution of obligors across grades and calibration 
segments in the internal and external data (for instance, by obtaining an 
average of the external default rate weighted by the internal distribution of 
exposures across grades for the relevant reference dates). Where the results of 
the above-mentioned comparison show material differences between the 
internal and external series at any of the three levels mentioned which cannot 
be explained by the analysis mentioned in the previous sentence, this is an 
indication that the representativeness of the external data is not proven. If this is 
the case, including in instances where differences might be driven by data 
scarcity issues, the institution might still use external data if the conditions set 
out in paragraph 38 are fulfilled. 
126. In particular, to assess whether the parameter estimates are biased as per 
paragraph 38 of this chapter, institutions should compare the LRA default rate 
using only internal data with the average PD estimates (before adding an MoC) 
resulting from their application to the internal exposures over the set of all 
reference dates within the period representative of the likely range of variability. 
The ECB understands that the estimates will be biased if either of the following 
conditions are met: (a) at calibration segment level there are material 
differences between the average of the two previous elements of comparison; 
or (b) at grade level there are systematic differences (i.e. the direction of the 
differences is not random). It is the ECB’s understanding that the identification 
of material differences in (a) and systematic differences in (b) should not rely 
only on statistical significance. In particular, the lack of statistical evidence that 
a PD estimate and the corresponding LRA default rate based on internal data 
(at calibration segment in (a) and grade level in (b)) are different is, in the ECB’s 
view, not sufficient to conclude that a material difference does not exist, 
especially in cases where data are scarce. This quantitative analysis is 
independent of and complementary to the calibration tests required by 
paragraph 87 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. These calibration tests 
should be performed on the data used for the calibration (including 
external/pooled data used in the calculation of the default rates and in the 
calculation of the average PD on the calibration sample). 


5.2.3 Calibration to the LRA default rate 


127. To calculate the LRA default rate, institutions should follow paragraphs 
82 to 86 
of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. If an institution makes adjustments to 
the observed average default rates in order to obtain LRA default rates under 



paragraph 
85(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, these adjustments 
should be based on (external) default rates, or 
– if no appropriate default rates 
are available 
– on other observed indicators relevant for the type of exposures 
considered. 
128. For the purpose of assessing the representativeness of the historical 
observation period used for the likely range of variability of one-year default 
rates under paragraph 
83 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, the following 
should be taken into account. 
(a) Where the scarcity of internal exposures and/or defaults might unduly 
influence the variability of internally observed default rates (i.e. 
where the 
variability driven by statistical uncertainty is so high in comparison with the 
structural variability of default rates that it hampers any analysis of them), 
institutions should assess whether external or pooled default rate series 
can be used to identify the relevant historical observation period for the 
likely range of variability of one-year default rates. The external or pooled 
default series used should be relevant for the specific portfolio at least in 
terms of geographical composition, sectoral distribution and other relevant 
risk drivers. When no relevant default rate series can be identified, the 
items described in paragraphs 
83(b) and 83(c) of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD should play a crucial role in the assessment. 
(b) When taking into account the existence of one-year default rates relating 
to bad years as reflected in economic indicators that are relevant for the 
considered types of exposures within the historical observation period as 
referred to in paragraph 
83(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, 
institutions should ensure that such indicators are relevant for the portfolio 
at least in the terms of geographical composition, sectoral distribution and 
other risk drivers relevant to the portfolio. 



129. With respect to calibration to the LRA default rate, institutions should follow 
paragraphs 
87 to 99 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
130. For the purposes of complying with the provisions of paragraph 92 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD, it is the ECB’s understanding that all the following 
principles apply. 
(a) Institutions should document the rationale of their adopted approach and 
provide evidence that, irrespective of whether the calibration considers (i) 
the LRA default rate at grade or pool level according to paragraph 92(a) of 
the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD or (ii) the LRA default rate at 
calibration segment level according to paragraph 92(b) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD, the PD estimates are adequate both at grade 
or pool level and at calibration segment level. In any case, all the 
requirements on risk differentiation referred to in the applicable regulation 
apply. The ECB’s understanding of these requirements is set out in 
Section 5.1.2 of this chapter. In particular, it follows from the applicable 
rules that under no circumstances should an approach be adopted to 






overcome data scarcity at grade or pool level, lack of evidence of 
discriminatory capacity, homogeneity or heterogeneity across grades. 
(b) Regardless of the level at which institutions consider the LRA default rate 
in accordance with paragraph 92 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, 
in the ECB’s view the LRA default rate needs to be calculated at grade or 
pool level and at calibration segment level since these LRA default rates 
are required either directly for calibration purposes or indirectly in order to 
provide meaningful additional calibration tests. 
(c) For the purposes of obtaining the LRA default rate at grade or pool level 
and at calibration segment level, the availability of long series of observed 
one-year default rates covering the full period representative of the likely 
range of variability of default rates is of utmost importance. The ECB 
expects institutions to take all reasonable efforts to obtain such long series 
with sufficient data quality in line with the provisions of paragraph 70 of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
(d) Without prejudice to the application of adequate methodologies to correct 
identified deficiencies in order to overcome biases in risk parameter 
estimates as required in paragraph 38 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and 
LGD, in cases where long series of one-year default rates are available at 
grade or pool level and calibration segment level covering the period 
representative of the likely range of variability of default rates, in 
accordance with paragraph 84 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD the 
LRA default rate should be computed as the observed average of one-year 
default rates at grade or pool level and calibration segment level in that 
period. 
(e) Where an institution is unable to obtain long series of one-year default 
rates as described in point (c) above, the underlying reasons should be 
duly justified and documented. In any case, in accordance with point (b) 
above, the ECB expects institutions to estimate the LRA default rate at 
grade or pool level, and calibration segment level by adjusting the 
observed average of one-year default rates, where necessary, in 
accordance with paragraph 85 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. The 





In the specific case of changes in the method for assigning exposures to 
grades or pools, and in accordance with paragraph 98(a) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions should make all reasonable efforts 
to recalculate the new assignment back through time covering the full 
period representative of the likely range of variability of default rates, as 
such grade or pool level information is necessary to obtain long series of 
one-year default rates at grade or pool level. Institutions should duly justify 
and document situations where backwards recalculation is not possible. 
Additionally, in the exceptional cases where such recalculation is not 
possible, institutions should assess whether the use of the historical rating 
assignments based on previous versions of the assignment methodology 
would be adequate. 



adjustment should at least be reflective66 of the number of good and bad 
years in the available data with respect to the number of good and bad 
years applicable to the period representative of the likely range of 
variability. This means that where the number of bad years is under-
represented in the available data, upward adjustments should be made to 
the observed average of one-year default rates, unless the institution is 
able to provide empirical evidence that the level of observed one-year 
default rates is unrelated to the years being good or bad. The adjustment 
must be reflective of the variability of the default rates, meaning that the 
larger the variability in the default rates, the larger the necessary 
adjustments might be. As a consequence, in the case of the LRA default 
rate at grade level, the necessary adjustment depends on the grade 
assignment dynamics among other things. 





66 
This is also without prejudice to the application of adequate methodologies to correct identified 
deficiencies in order to overcome biases in risk parameter estimates as required in paragraph 38 of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 


67 
Unless the institution makes use of the weighting for retail exposures according to Article 180(2)(e) of 
the CRR. 


68 
Considering the same time frame and calculation dates as the LRA default rate, including any most 
recent calculation dates available when the tests are performed as part of the ongoing monitoring of the 
models. 


Moreover, institutions should duly analyse and document the need for an 
MoC in accordance with Article 46(3)(b) of Commission Delegated 
Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 and in accordance with paragraph 42 of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, which requires the MoC to reflect in 
particular the uncertainty related to the deficiencies referred to in 
paragraph 37(a)(iii) and 37(a)(x) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. In 
the ECB’s understanding, and in line with paragraph 43(a)(ii) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD, the larger the adjustments to the observed 
average of one-year default rates and the larger the unavailable time 
period in proportion to the period representative of the likely range of 
variability of default rates, the larger the uncertainty of the adjustments and 
hence the greater the need for and magnitude of such an MoC. 


131. Where, for calibration purposes, the LRA default rate is considered at the level 
of grade or pool in accordance with paragraph 92(a) of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD, it is the ECB’s understanding that the PD (before MoC) of each 
grade or pool should be equal to the LRA default rate of each grade or pool. 
This is without prejudice to the provisions of the next paragraph. 
132. Where an institution adopts the approach referred to in paragraph 
92(a) of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, it should provide additional tests at the level of 
the relevant calibration segment. To this end, as part of the estimation and 
ongoing monitoring of its models, an institution should, at least, compare the 
LRA PD at calibration segment level with the LRA default rate at calibration 
segment. In performing this comparison, the institution should calculate the LRA 
PD at calibration segment level as the arithmetic67 average across time68 of the 
(arithmetic) average PD at calibration segment level for each reference date. 
Deviations should be analysed and documented, and should trigger adequate 



remedial action where necessary. Where an institution does not explicitly define 
calibration segments as subsets of the range of application of the PD model, a 
single calibration segment covering the whole range of application of the PD 
model must be considered for the above-mentioned test. 
133. Where, for calibration purposes, the LRA default rate is considered at 
calibration segment level in accordance with paragraph 92(b) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD, it is the ECB’s understanding that institutions 
should be aware of situations where divergences between the LRA default rate 
at a grade level and the grade level PD value could arise. These situations 
include the following. 
(a) The use of a calibration sample for the purposes of obtaining the 
adjustment to be made to the scores/raw PDs at grade level in order to 
meet the LRA default rate at calibration segment level which is not fully 
representative of the likely range of variability of default rates may result in 
PD estimates at grade level which are lower than the LRA default rate at 
grade level. This could happen, for example, when the grade assignment 
is to some extent sensitive to the economic conditions69, and bad years 
are over-represented in the calibration sample, in which case a biased 
adjustment may be obtained as a result of the distribution across grades of 
the calibration sample being overpopulated in riskier grades compared 
with the sample corresponding to the period of the LRA default rate. 
(b) The use of a calibration sample70 for the purposes of obtaining the 
scores/raw PDs at grade level or the use of a calibration methodology 
where the discriminatory power implied by the PDs at grade level is not 
consistent with the discriminatory power implied by the observed average 
of the one-year default rates at grade level from the sample corresponding 
to the period of the LRA default rate71 may result in PD estimates at grade 
level which do not reflect the LRA default rate at grade level. 



134. The ECB expects that institutions will duly justify the choice of the calibration 
sample and methodology and in particular assess its adequacy in terms of 
situations (a) and (b) mentioned in the previous paragraph. 
135. Where an institution adopts the approach referred to in paragraph 
92(b) of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, it should perform additional tests as part of the 


69 
This is without prejudice to the provisions set out in Section 5.1.3 of this chapter. 


70 
The ECB understands that any sample used for calibration purposes should fulfil the requirements set 
out for the calibration sample. As such, the term “calibration sample” will be used here not only to refer 
to the sample on which “the resulting PD estimates correspond to the long-run average default rate at 
the level relevant for the applied method” (definition of PD calibration in paragraph 8 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD) but also to any other sample used for calibration purposes. 


71 
In other words, the slope of the obtained PD curve is not consistent with the slope of the curve of the 
LRA default rate at grade level. For example, one way in which the implied discriminatory power/slope 
can be numerically compared is by computing (a) the AUC (area under the ROC curve) that would be 
obtained on the basis of the number of exposures per grade in a given sample and the number of 
defaults per grade equal to the PD estimates times the number of exposures in the grade, and (b) the 
AUC that would be obtained on the basis of the number of exposures per grade in the same sample 
and the number of defaults per grade equal to the LRA default rate per grade times the number of 
exposures in the grade. 



development and ongoing monitoring of its models to ensure that the final (post-
calibration) PDs reflect the LRA default rate of each grade. Specifically, 
institutions should ensure that there are no systematic deviations when 
comparing the estimated PDs with the LRA default rate of the grades, i.e. 
the 
direction of divergences across grades should be random regardless of the 
materiality or statistical significance of the deviations. For example, deviations 
(statistically material or not) occurring in a given direction for a number of 
consecutive grades are understood by the ECB to be systematic deviations. 


In any case, even if the deviations are not systematic, the ECB expects 
institutions to demonstrate that such grade-level deviations do not distort the 
RWEA calculations. For that purpose, institutions should analyse any material 
difference between the RWEAs resulting from the current calibration and the 
RWEAs resulting from the application of alternative PDs calculated on the basis 
of the LRA default rate at grade level for the application portfolio, and reach a 
conclusion on the appropriateness of the adopted methodology on the basis of 
such a comparison. 


136. Under paragraph 87 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions should 
have sound and well-defined processes in place to ensure sound calibration 
including quantitative calibration tests and supplementary qualitative analyses. 
It is the ECB’s understanding that, as part of these tests, institutions should 
compare the average PD (before MoC) at calibration segment level with the 
one-year default rate and with the LRA default rate at calibration segment level 
for each of the calculation dates adopted for LRA default rate calculation. 
Institutions should reach a conclusion on the appropriateness of the final (post-
calibration) PD level at calibration segment on the basis of such comparisons 
and by taking into consideration the grade assignment dynamics of the PD 
model. 
137. Under paragraph 89 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions should 
ensure that for the purpose of calibrating PD estimates to the LRA default rate, 
any overrides applied in the assignment of obligors to grades or pools are taken 
into account. However, where the appropriate consideration of overrides in the 
calibration process is not possible, institutions should apply an appropriate 
adjustment (AA) to the extent possible and a corresponding MoC 
to account for 
the uncertainty associated with the lack of consideration of overrides within the 
model calibration. In order to evaluate the need for an AA and an MoC and to 
quantify them, institutions may, for example, use the outcome of a re-rating of a 
representative sample (including the application of the new overrides policy) at 
a recent date. In addition, the appropriateness of this MoC should be reviewed 
during the review of estimates, also taking into consideration the impact of the 
overrides on the ratings of the whole portfolio after implementation of the new 
model in the production environment. 



5.2.4 Weighting for retail exposures 


138. Notwithstanding paragraph 
127, for retail exposures institutions need not give 
equal importance to historical data if more recent data are a better predictor of 
loss rates.72 In the understanding of the ECB an institution may consider that 
the more recent data are a better predictor of loss rates and may give more 
importance to recent historical data if the following apply. 
(a) There is a significant improvement in the predictive power when using the 
more recent data with respect to the predictive power resulting from the 
use of an arithmetic average under paragraph 
81 of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD. This improvement should be evidenced by comparing the 
estimated PDs for each grade with the realised default rates covering as 
long a period as possible, in accordance with Article 
185(b) of the CRR. 
(b) Older data are considered as non-representative as a result of specific 
policy or business changes in the bank, but not in order to reflect current 
trends in default rates directly related to macroeconomic conditions. 
(c) The weighting approach is used in a consistent manner over time and any 
change in the applied weights of historical data is appropriately justified. 





72 
Article 
180(2)(e) of the CRR. 


5.2.5 PD quantification based on mapping to external grades 


139. The ECB interprets the possibility for institutions to attribute the default rate 
observed for the grades of a rating agency or similar organisation to its own 
grades in accordance with Article 
180(1)(f) of the CRR as being equivalent to 
the use of external data for PD quantification at a more aggregated level 
(external grade) rather than at the obligor/facility level. Accordingly, Sections 
3.2 
and 5.2.2 of this chapter are relevant for institutions that do so. 
140. In accordance with Article 
180(1)(f) of the CRR, mappings must be based on a 
comparison of internal rating criteria with the criteria used by the external 
organisation and on a comparison of the internal and external ratings of any 
common obligors. Biases or inconsistencies in the mapping approach or 
underlying data must be avoided. To comply with these requirements, 
institutions should follow the paragraphs listed below. 
(a) Institutions should ensure that the quality of the mapping between internal 
and external rating scales at a given date and over time is consistent and 
provides for an adequate level of predictive ability. 
(b) When mapping internal grades to external grades, institutions should 
document and analyse any differences between the external and internal 
rating criteria. 






(c) The use of common obligors as a basis for the mapping should take into 
account their representativeness for the application portfolio. 
(d) Institutions should adjust the external rating scale if such rating scale does 
not solely embed default risk.73 They should also document such 
adjustments. 
(e) When mapping internal grades to external grades and using the default 
rates of the external grades provided by the organisation, if the latter has a 
material number of entities for which it no longer provides a rating 
(withdrawn rating), the institution should take this into account. It should 
adjust the external default rates accordingly, if necessary, and take into 
consideration the provisions of paragraph 
75 of the EBA Guidelines on PD 
and LGD. In the event that an adjustment is performed, the institution 
should add the necessary MoC. 





73 
In accordance with Article 
170(1)(b) of the CRR, institutions’ rating systems must have an obligor rating 
scale which reflects exclusively the quantification of the risk of obligor default. 


5.2.6 Specific requirements for direct PD estimates 


141. In order to use direct PD estimates for the calculation of own funds 
requirements in accordance with Article 
169(3) of the CRR, institutions should 
follow paragraphs 
96 and 98(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. To 
assess whether the theoretical assumptions of the probability model underlying 
the estimation methodology are satisfied to a sufficient extent in practice under 
paragraph 
96 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions should do the 
following. 
(a) Ensure good risk differentiation properties across the full PD range of the 
rating system. 
(b) Have an adequate and documented concept in place specifying the 
calibration function currently implemented (concrete functional form), 
including the underlying theoretical assumptions and the established 
processes to conduct the PD calibration. It is the ECB’s understanding that 
institutions should ensure consistency between the score-inferred PDs and 
the observed default rates and should understand and justify the 
transformation of the scores into PD values. 
(c) Ensure that any transformation of the scores resulting from the probability 
model that is applied during the calibration does not change the ranking of 
the obligors/facilities (in other words, co-monotonicity between scores/raw 
PDs and PD values should be ensured). Moreover, institutions should 
avoid any undue influence of extreme values of score-inferred PDs on the 
shape of the calibration function. Additionally, and when institutions use 
different calibration functions for different sub-ranges, they should ensure 






that this mix is appropriate (both in terms of the functional forms used and 
the cut-offs selected) and that it is appropriately justified. 
(d) Ensure that there is a relevant number of observations across the whole 
range of score-inferred PDs. Particular interest should be paid to situations 
where the probability model is extended to ranges of PD values where 
there are not enough defaulted observations. 
(e) Ensure that there are no excessive concentrations of exposures or 
obligors within the PD range of the rating system. In addition, high 
concentrations of observations in a specific range of score-inferred PDs 
should be properly analysed and justified in terms of homogeneity. 
(f) For the purpose of performing the additional tests at grade level referred to 
in paragraph 
92(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, grades should 
be understood as sub-ranges of PD values. These sub-ranges should be 
defined in a way that: 
(i) represents sufficiently narrow ranges of PD values; 
(ii) contains a sufficient number of observations to ensure a meaningful 
calculation of the LRA default rate of the sub-range. 








142. In cases where institutions map the PDs to a masterscale (defined in terms of 
PD bounds) as a final step in the PD estimation process (using masterscale 
discrete PDs for the purpose of RWEA calculation), there is a risk that the 
mapping process could distort RWEAs. To mitigate this risk, institutions should 
verify that deviations between the masterscale PDs and the average of the 
direct PDs assigned to obligors in each grade do not show a systematic or 
material bias towards underestimation of PD per grade over time. This analysis 
should be provided for both the portfolio and for each grade. 



6 Loss given default 


6.1 Realised LGD 


6.1.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 14 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

4 

(1)(55) 

5 

(2) 

144 

(1)(e) 

161 

(2), (3) 

164 

(2) 

166 

(1) 

174 

(c) 

175 

(1), (4)(a) 

176 

(4), (5) 

179 

(1)(a), (c), (d) and second sub-paragraph 

181 

(1)(a), (h), (i), (j), (2)(b) and second sub-paragraph 

182 

(3) 

183 

(2) 

185 

(a) 

191 

 

Commission Delegated 
Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

3 

(1), (2)(c) 

11 

(2)(a) 

17 

(1)(a) 

30 

(1)(a) 

31 

 

37 

(2)(a), (b) 

42 

(1)(a), (c), (d), (2)(a), (b) 

47 

 

48 

(b), (c), (d), (g), (h) 

49 

(b), (c) 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

37(a)(viii), 100-103, 131-146 

EBA Guidelines on DoD 

18/01/2017 

 

44, 51, 71, 72, 77 



 



6.1.2 Reference dataset 


143. Under paragraph 
102 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions should 
estimate LGDs on the basis of their own loss or recovery experience.74 
Institutions may supplement their own historical data on defaulted exposures 
with external data. The more own loss experience (i.e. 
the more internal 
defaults) an institution has, the less importance it needs to give to external data. 
Institutions should ensure that their own historical experience contains a 
minimum number of defaults in order to determine whether external data are 
sufficiently representative. 
144. To ensure that LGD estimations are accurate and are not underestimated as a 
result of different external and internal recovery processes, institutions should 
place greater importance on comparisons of internal recovery processes with 
the recovery processes underlying the external data, in cases where a high 
weight is assigned to external data. Where limited representativeness of 
external data is found, a category A MoC should be considered, in order to 
reflect the uncertainty of the estimation under paragraph 
37(a)(viii) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD. Its magnitude should also be quantified in relation 
to the weight assigned to the external data. 
145. When institutions use information derived from the market price of defaulted 
financial instruments to supplement their internal loss or recovery experience 
data, there is a risk of misspecification of their LGD estimates. To mitigate this 
risk, institutions should ensure the following: 
(a) institutions should verify whether the development sample is 
representative of the application portfolio at least in terms of regions and 
product type, even when those variables have not been identified as 
relevant risk drivers; 
(b) losses derived from market prices should be increased to reflect indirect 
costs, as specified in paragraph 
146 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and 
LGD. 





74 
In accordance with paragraph 109 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, the RDS should contain all 
relevant information in relation to losses and recovery processes. This should also include climate-
related and environmental information where relevant and material. 


6.1.3 Calculation of realised LGD 


146. Article 
4(1)(55) of the CRR defines LGD as the ratio of the loss on an exposure 
due to the default of a counterparty to the amount outstanding at default. For 
the purposes of Article 
181(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions are required to 
calculate realised LGD. To comply with this requirement, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that institutions should calculate realised LGD under 
paragraphs 
100 to 103 and 131 to 146 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 



In addition, when performing this calculation institutions should follow the 
observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
147. In accordance with Article 
181(1)(h) of the CRR, institutions must have 
estimates of LGD in-default and ELBE on defaulted exposures. To comply with 
this requirement, it is the ECB’s understanding that all principles regarding the 
calculation of realised LGD should be applied for the estimation of LGD on non-
defaulted exposures and for the estimation of LGD in-default and ELBE on 
defaulted exposures, unless mentioned otherwise (that is, if the reference date 
is considered instead of the date of default). 
148. Where, in the case of retail exposures and purchased corporate receivables, 
institutions derive LGD estimates from realised losses and appropriate 
estimates of PDs in accordance with Articles 
161(2) and 181(2)(a) of the CRR 
and under paragraph 
103 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, all the 
principles regarding realised LGD should apply to realised losses. 
149. Institutions must document the specific definitions of default and loss used 
internally and ensure that they are consistent with the definitions set out in the 
CRR.75 To comply with these requirements, institutions should have in place 
sufficiently detailed policies and procedures to ensure that the realised LGD is 
calculated consistently and accurately, including the implementation of the 
definition of economic loss. These policies and procedures should include 
sufficiently detailed documentation to allow third parties to replicate the 
calculation of realised LGD. To ensure that the policies and procedures are 
implemented in an appropriate and adequate manner, the calculation process 
should be regularly reviewed by an independent unit. 
150. In accordance with Article 
181(1)(a) of the CRR and under paragraph 
100 of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions should calculate the realised LGD 
at facility level for each default. In line with paragraph 112 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD, where aggregated information is collected and 
stored, the realised LGD at facility level may be calculated using this more 
aggregated information, in which case institutions should define a proper 
methodology for the allocation of recoveries and costs to each individual facility. 
The ECB expects institutions to duly justify and document the underlying 
reasons for the collection and storage at a more aggregated level than facility 
level. 
151. In exceptional cases, the ECB considers institutions to be compliant with the 
requirement to calculate realised LGD at facility level if they can prove that the 
recovery is not performed at individual facility level but at a more aggregated 
level (for example, several facilities of the same or different types secured by 
the same collateral). The realised LGD can therefore be calculated at a more 
aggregated level than individual facility level. For this exceptional deviation from 


75 
Article 
175(3) of the CRR. 



the calculation of realised LGD at facility level to be acceptable, institutions 
should: 
(a) provide evidence that recovery at aggregated level is legally enforceable. 
(b) on a regular basis (as often as review of estimates is performed or more 
often), provide evidence that recovery at a more aggregated level than 
single facility level is in practice enforced. This evidence should be based 
on the institution’s historical practice and data and demonstrate that both 
the recovery process and its outcomes in terms of realised loss or 
recovery are the same for all the facilities considered at the aggregated 
level. Specifically, institutions should be able to prove that all collateral 
within an aggregation is called irrespective of the product triggering default 
(thus, for a current account as for a home loan) and that realised loss or 
observed recovery is the same for all types of facility within the 
aggregation. 
(c) for retail exposures where institutions use the definition of default at facility 
level set out in the last sentence of Article 
178(1) of the CRR, ensure that 
the default is triggered for all aggregated facilities. 
(d) ensure that the parameters are applied in a manner that is consistent with 
how they have been estimated, i.e. 
across aggregated facilities; 
(e) ensure that the counting unit used for the purposes of risk quantification is 
at this aggregated level; 
(f) ensure that no bias results from the aggregation of facilities, by validating 
the estimates (PD, LGD, CCF) at the more aggregated level also. 
(a) Outstanding amount at default includes any part of the exposure that has 
been forgiven or written off before or at the date of default (paragraph 
134 
of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD). Institutions should ensure 
consistency with the accounting value gross of credit risk adjustment 





In addition, institutions following this approach should: 


152. As mentioned in paragraph 
146, for the purposes of Article 
181(1)(a) of the 
CRR institutions are required to calculate realised LGD, which is defined by 
Article 
4(1)(55) of the CRR as the ratio of the loss on an exposure due to the 
default of a counterparty to the amount outstanding at default. Furthermore, 
Article 
5(2) of the CRR defines loss as an economic loss, including material 
discount effects, and material direct and indirect costs associated with collecting 
on the instrument. In accordance with these provisions, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that institutions should calculate realised LGD as a ratio of the 
economic loss to the outstanding amount of the credit obligation at the moment 
of default, including any amount of principal, interest or fee (hereinafter 
outstanding amount at default). To calculate realised LGD, institutions should 
follow paragraphs 
131 to 146 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. In 
addition, they should pay particular attention to the following points. 



(i.e 
“provisions”) (Article 
166(1) of the CRR) by explaining any differences. 
This amount also includes interest and fees capitalised in the institution’s 
income statement before the moment of default. However, interest and 
fees capitalised after the moment of default are not considered 
(paragraphs 
137 to 138 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD). Where 
institutions include additional drawings after the moment of default to 
estimate CCFs, these additional drawings discounted to the moment of 
default are added to the outstanding amount at default in the denominator 
(paragraphs 
139 to 142 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD). In other 
words, institutions should ensure that the exposure used for CCF 
estimation, where additional drawings after default are discounted with the 
same discount factor as applied for LGD, is consistent with the 
denominator of the LGD. 
(b) Economic loss is calculated under paragraph 
132 of the EBA Guidelines 
on PD and LGD. This also applies in the specific case of facilities that 
return to non-defaulted status, where losses arising from payment delays 
are expected to be accounted for as well as the “artificial cash flow” 
envisaged by paragraph 
135 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
(c) When recoveries are not directly observed but calculated on the basis of 
the difference between exposure values at two consecutive dates or 
derived, even partially, from some other treatment, all assumptions should 
be duly justified and clearly documented in order to adequately replicate 
the recovery flows that occur during the recovery process in accordance 
with letters a) and b) above. Institutions are expected to pay particular 
attention to the treatment of interest and fees capitalised after default, the 
treatment of additional drawings and the treatment of write-offs. 
(a) Paragraph 
134 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD refers to all losses 
incurred through forgiveness or write-off. 
(b) Where institutions open new facilities to replace previously defaulted 
facilities as part of restructuring or for technical reasons, the economic loss 
should include the decrease in the degree of financial obligation arising 
from changes in the contractual conditions (i.e. 
material forgiveness or 
postponement of payment of principal, interest, or fees). The amount by 
which the financial obligation has diminished should be calculated under 
paragraph 
51 of the EBA Guidelines on DoD. However, no double-
counting of debt forgiveness is intended (for example, in the case of 
exposures that return to non-defaulted status, a possible double-counting 
through the diminished financial obligation and the artificial cash flow is not 
intended). 
(c) Realised LGD for individual facilities may be zero or lower when it is the 
actual result of the recovery process (for example, where additional 





153. The economic loss as defined in Article 
5(2) of the CRR also includes material 
discounts. The ECB’s understanding is as follows. 



recoveries offset the discounting effect and costs). Institutions should, 
however, pay particular attention to no-loss exposures, since they may 
reveal issues with the calculation of realised losses 
– for example, costs 
not being adequately allocated to recovery processes, or inadequate 
treatment of amounts forgiven or written off. 





6.1.4 Treatment of multiple defaults 


154. For the purpose of LGD estimation and in order to ensure an appropriate 
measurement of economic loss as defined in Article 
5(2) of the CRR, institutions 
should consider an exposure that returns to normal status and subsequently 
defaults in a short period of time as being constantly defaulted from the moment 
the first default occurred. This treatment should be applied under 
paragraph 
101 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. In addition, institutions 
should follow the observations in the following paragraphs. 
(a) Paragraph 
101 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD envisages the 
definition of a period longer than nine months when this is appropriate for 
the specific type of exposures and reflects the economic meaning of the 
default experience. It is the ECB’s understanding that a longer period is 
adequate when the proportion of subsequent defaults occurring on 
individual facilities over a period of more than nine months is significant, 
unless institutions are able to provide evidence that the second (or 
subsequent) default is unconnected with the original default event. This 
evidence may include analysis of the curing process. 
(b) In the particular case of an institution opening new facilities to replace 
previously defaulted facilities as part of restructuring or for technical 
reasons, it should be able to make or trace a connection between the 
restructured facility and the facility (or facilities) previously advanced and 
which it is restructuring. 





6.1.5 Treatment of massive disposals (Article 500 of the CRR) 


155. Article 500 of the CRR allows institutions to adjust their LGD estimates “by 
partly or fully offsetting the effect of massive disposals of defaulted exposures 
on realised LGDs up to the difference between the average estimated LGDs for 
comparable exposures in default that have not been finally liquidated and the 
average realised LGDs including on the basis of the losses realised due to 
massive disposals”, subject to certain conditions. 
156. Article 500 of the CRR specifies that, irrespective of the date of disposal, the 
adjustment may only be carried out until 28 June 2022. Since this date has 
passed, it is no longer possible to request additional adjustments under this 
Article. However, the effect of existing adjustments may last for as long as the 
corresponding exposures are included in the institution´s own LGD estimates. 



Furthermore, existing adjustments in accordance with Article 500 (and therefore 
carried out by 28 June 2022) may still be subject to change after 28 June 2022. 


The dates of disposal mentioned in Article 500 (1)(b) of the CRR should be the 
dates of transfer of the legal ownership of assets. Article 500 of the CRR 
contains a time limit corresponding to the period from 23 November 2016 to 28 
June 2022. Only the date of disposal is relevant for determining whether this 
time limit has been complied with. 


157. An institution must qualify for the use of Article 500 of the CRR by meeting the 
conditions set out therein, or be a subsidiary or parent of an institution which 
thus qualifies. In the case of a parent, the ECB considers that the adjustment at 
the consolidated level should reflect the adjustment conducted by the qualifying 
subsidiary or subsidiaries only. 
158. Article 500(1)(c) of CRR sets out a threshold condition that must be met in order 
to qualify for the use of this Article. The denominator of the 20% threshold must 
be understood as the outstanding amount of defaulted exposures as of the date 
of the first disposal according to the plan submitted to the competent authority.76 
It is the ECB’s understanding that the threshold condition should be evaluated 
at the level of the institution submitting the plan referred to in Article 500(1)(a) of 
the CRR. 
159. With respect to whether the inclusion of foreclosed assets (the repossession 
and sale of collateral as referred to in paragraph 115(b) of the EBA Guidelines 
on PD and LGD) in the Article 500 adjustment is permissible, the ECB 
considers it important to distinguish between the sale of an exposure and the 
sale of collateral. Only the former, but not the latter, is covered by Article 500 of 
the CRR. Consequently, since Article 500 of the CRR refers to the use of 
defaulted exposures for the calculation of the threshold and the adjustment 
itself, foreclosed assets cannot be included in either. 
160. It is the ECB’s understanding77 that “the average estimated LGDs for 
comparable exposures in default that have not been finally liquidated” can be 
calculated based on the institution’s incomplete workout treatment applied to 
the exposures as of the date before the date of their disposal. This calculation 
implies an adjustment back to the estimated LGD that would have occurred if 
the standard workout process had been followed instead of the massive 
disposals process. Where an institution follows this approach, it should ensure 
the following. 
(a) The requirements related to the institution’s incomplete workout treatment 
should be in line with paragraphs 153 to 159 of the EBA Guidelines on PD 
and LGD. In particular, the uncertainty referred to in 159(f) will persist 
indefinitely, and so the related MoC will also have to persist as long as the 
adjusted observations are used for the estimation of parameters. 





76 
See also EBA Q&A with Question ID 2019_4824. 


77 
See also EBA Q&A with Question ID 2019_4814. 



(b) During the annual review of estimates of its LGD models, it should be 
assessed whether the use of newly available information would increase 
the accuracy of the Article 500 adjustment performed in the past. For this 
purpose the institution should have pre-defined, internally approved criteria 
to decide whether the accuracy of the Article 500 adjustment can be 
increased. If the accuracy can be increased, the institutions should 
perform a new Article 500 adjustment by incorporating this new relevant 
data and information in accordance with Article 179(1)(a) of the CRR, 
including appropriate documentation showing that the pre-defined criteria 
have been met. The ECB expects the update to the Article 500 adjustment 
to reflect the (economic) conditions and processes as of the date of 
disposal and not as of the date of the adjustment. 
(c) It is expected that once a sufficiently long time has passed since the 
massive disposal, there will be no new information that can be considered 
relevant for the adjustment (in particular, a sufficiently long time may be 
considered to have passed once most of the cases that were incomplete 
as of the date of the disposals have been closed or if the maximum period 
of the recovery process has been reached as of the time of the 
estimation). If this is the case, it will not be necessary to modify the Article 
500 adjustment performed in previous calibrations. The supervised entity 
should make a proposal as to what constitutes a sufficiently long time 
based on (i) the average time of assets in default as of the date of the 
massive disposal, and (ii) the maximum time of the recovery process. The 
specific MoC related to the uncertainty of the cash flows should be 
reviewed in accordance with the MoC framework, taking newly available 
information into account for the same sufficiently long period of time. 


161. The data used to develop the incomplete workout treatment should be 
representative of the portfolio of disposed assets. The institution should have 
criteria in place to assess representativeness by comparing key characteristics 
of the portfolios in line with paragraph 37(b)(ii) and Sections 4.2.2 to 4.2.4 of the 
EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. Any issues of representativeness should be 
appropriately reflected in the MoC related to the Article 500 adjustment. 
162. For the portfolio of disposed assets to which Article 500 CRR is applied, 
institutions should collect and store both the adjusted, realised LGDs and the 
actual sale price of disposed assets within their RDS. 
163. Regarding the treatment of incomplete workouts, in order to avoid circular logic 
if the Article 500 adjustment is based on the incomplete workout treatment, then 
from the date of the massive disposal onwards, and in the case of disposed 
assets only, supervised entities are not expected to analyse costs and 
recoveries as described in paragraph 159(a) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and 
LGD. 
164. According to the ECB’s understanding, Article 500 authorises adjustments to 
the calculation of the following parameters: observed average LGD; LRA LGD; 
downturn LGD; ELBE; and LGD in-default. 



165. For the calculation of the observed average LGD, the adjusted realised LGD of 
the exposures subject to the Article 500 adjustment should be included. 
166. It is the ECB’s understanding that all the defaults subject to the massive 
disposal adjustment should be treated as closed observations. In particular, 
they should be treated as such for the purpose of determining the maximum 
period of the recovery process as referred to in paragraph 156 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD with the date of the massive disposal as the closure 
date, unless institutions can provide firm evidence that this approach has a 
significant and unjustifiable biasing impact. 
167. The relevant downturn period in accordance with paragraph 15 of the 
EBA/GL/2019/03 and the LGD appropriate for a downturn should be identified 
based on the realised LGDs of the observed defaults after the application of the 
Article 500 adjustment. 
168. For LGD in-default and ELBE estimates, it is expected that the massive 
disposal cash flow will be replaced by a cash flow or cash flows adjusted in line 
with the Article 500 adjustment. 
169. Defaults subject to a massive disposal should be removed from the analysis 
underlying the setting of the reference dates as referred to in paragraph 171 of 
the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 


6.2 LGD structure 


6.2.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 15 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

143 

(3) second sub-paragraph 

144 

(1)(a), (f), (h) 

169 

(3) 

170 

(1)(e), (f), (3)(b), (c), (4) 

174 

(d) 

175 

(1), (4)(b) 

179 

(1)(a) 

185 

(a), (b), (c) 

190 

(1) 

Commission Delegated 
Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

33, 34, 35, 36 

 

38 

(a) 

40 

 

48 

(i) 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

121, 122, 123 



 



170. A grade or pool is understood by the ECB to be the subset of facilities to which 
the same LGD is applied for the calculation of regulatory capital requirements, 
irrespective of how this LGD has been assigned. 
171. In order to comply with the requirements regarding the structure of LGD models 
as set out in Article 
170(1)(e) and (f) and 170(3)(b) and (c) of the CRR, 
institutions should follow the observations below. 
172. LGD estimates must be based on the material drivers of risk.78 To comply with 
this requirement, institutions should identify and analyse potential risk drivers 
under paragraphs 
121 to 123 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD.79 When 
selecting the risk drivers, institutions should take into consideration any 
changes in product mix or characteristics between the reference and default 
dates. According to paragraph 122 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, 
“institutions should analyse the risk drivers not only at the moment of default but 
also at least within a year before default and should use reference dates for risk 
drivers that are representative of the realisations of the risk drivers within a year 
before default”. In the ECB’s understanding, this means that the choice of 
reference dates for risk drivers should ensure consistency with the expected 
distribution of defaults over the one-year horizon (and corresponding changes 
in the value of the risk driver) that are expected for the exposures to which the 
estimates are applied. In this context, where risk drivers vary over time, an 
approach consisting of a fixed (for all defaults) time horizon before default, 
particularly where this time horizon is less than 12 months, should not be used 
unless the institution is able to show that such an approach does not result in a 
lack of representativeness (in the sense of the previous sentence) leading to 
the final LGD estimates (at grade or pool level) being underestimated. 
173. Where an institution relies on one or more statistical models to define the 
process of assigning exposures to facility grades or pools (or parts of this 
process) in accordance with Article 175(4)(b) of the CRR, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that for institutions to comply with the requirement set out in 
Article 144(1)(a) of the CRR that rating systems should provide for a meaningful 
differentiation of risk as further explained in letters (c) and (e) of Article 30(3) of 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439, the statistical process 
followed by the institution in selecting its model(s) should include assessing the 
performance of the model(s) on the basis of independent datasets (data points 
which were left out of the model fitting) in a way that limits the risk of overfitting. 
Independent datasets should correspond not only to random sampling (out-of-
sample), but also to different time periods (out-of-time) unless there are no 
sufficient data available for the training sample. The expectations set out above 
in this paragraph are specifically related to the model development phase. Once 
the process for assigning exposures to facility grades or pools has been 
defined, the requirements related to the framework for the review of estimates 


78 
Article 
179(1)(a) of the CRR. 


79 
Institutions should consider all appropriate risk drivers in accordance with paragraph 121 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD. These should include climate-related and environmental risk drivers where 
relevant and material. 



under paragraphs 217 to 221 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD apply, 
together with the expectations set out in Section 9 of this guide. In particular, in 
accordance with paragraph 218(b)(i) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, 
the institution must carry out an analysis to identify any potential deterioration in 
the model’s performance, including the model’s discriminatory power, by 
comparing its performance at the time of the development with its performance 
over each subsequent observation period. 
174. Institutions’ rating systems must provide for a meaningful assessment of obligor 
and transaction characteristics, a meaningful differentiation of risk and accurate 
and consistent quantitative estimates of risk.80 It is the ECB’s understanding 
that to comply with this requirement institutions should demonstrate that, in 
terms of the range of application of LGD models, the model performs 
adequately (in terms of discriminatory power and predictive power) on 
economically significant and material sub-ranges of application of the rating 
systems. The sub-ranges are identified by splitting the full range of application 
of the LGD model into different parts on the basis of potential drivers for risk 
differentiation, among which, where relevant, the drivers referred to in 
paragraph 
121 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
175. The number of grades and pools must be adequate for a meaningful risk 
differentiation and for the quantification of the LGD at the grade or pool level.81 
To comply with this requirement, institutions should ensure the following 
(a) an adequate distribution of facilities across grades or pools in the datasets 
used for development and (initial and regular) validation. For this purpose: 
(i) any unusually low number of facilities in a grade or pool is expected 
to be supported by empirical evidence of the adequacy of isolating 
those facilities in a specific grade or pool; 
(ii) any unusually high concentration of facilities in a grade or pool is 
expected to be supported by empirical evidence of homogeneity 
within these grades or pools (for example by analysing whether some 
potential risk drivers (e.g. 
exposure size) that could further 
differentiate between riskier and less risky facilities have not been 
considered). 



(b) sufficient homogeneity of the risk within each grade or pool by providing 
empirical evidence that the grade-level LGD is adequate for all facilities in 
that grade. For this purpose, in cases where it is found (through the use of 
additional drivers or a different discretisation of the existing ones) that a 
material subset of facilities within a grade or pool yields a significantly 
different average realised LGD to that of the rest of the grade or pool, this 
is considered to indicate a lack of homogeneity. 





80 
Article 
144(1)(a) of the CRR. 


81 
Article 
170(1)(e) and (f) and 170(3)(b) and (c) of the CRR. 



(c) sufficient heterogeneity of the risk across grades or pools by providing 
empirical evidence that the average realised LGD is different across 
consecutive grades or pools, for subsets for which there is a meaningful 
order. 
(a) if the LGD estimates used to calculate the RWEAs are based on default 
weighted LRAs of realised LGDs for grades or pools, irrespective of 
whether at some point direct LGD estimates may have been used to 
define such grades or pools, this grade or pool level is the relevant one for 
the application of the principles set out in paragraph 
175; 
(b) when the situation described in point (a) above does not apply and, 
instead, several components are estimated separately and then combined 
in order to obtain the direct LGD estimates at facility level, institutions 
should adequately analyse and reflect in the model possible dependencies 
between the components (e.g. 
through relevant risk drivers); 
(c) in the case of other direct LGD estimates (i.e. 
where no components are 
defined) the principles above are expected to be applied where relevant. 
(a) the allocation of recovery flows to these components should be adequately 
documented and implemented in a consistent way where applicable; 
(b) risk differentiation (analogous to risk quantification) should be ensured with 
respect to facility level. 





176. Where an institution uses direct estimates of risk parameters, these may be 
seen as estimates assigned to grades on a continuous rating scale.82 In this 
case, in the ECB’s understanding the same requirements apply when an 
institution uses direct estimates of risk parameters as apply to grade-based 
models. To comply with these requirements, institutions are expected to ensure 
risk differentiation in accordance with the following principles: 
177. In addition to paragraph 176 above and where several components are 
estimated separately and then combined in order to obtain the direct LGD 
estimates at facility level, there is a risk that a meaningful differentiation of risk 
will not be achieved at facility level. To mitigate this risk, institutions should 
ensure that no bias is introduced in the risk differentiation when combining the 
different components in order to obtain the final LGD estimate at facility level. 
Specifically: 


82 
Article 
169(3) of the CRR. 



6.3 Risk quantification 


6.3.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 16 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

179 

(1)(a), (1)(d) 

181 

(1)(a), (b), (e), (f) and (2) 
second sub-paragraph 

185 

(b) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

47 

(c) 

48 

(a) to (f), (i) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2021/930 

01/03/2021 

 

 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

100, 116-118, 147-164 

EBA Guidelines for the estimation of LGD appropriate for an 
economic downturn (“Downturn LGD estimation”)83 

06/03/2019 

 

 



83 
EBA Guidelines for the estimation of LGD appropriate for an economic downturn (“Downturn LGD 
estimation”) (EBA/GL/2019/03), referred to in this guide as the “EBA Guidelines for the estimation of 
LGD appropriate for an economic downturn (“Downturn LGD estimation”)”. 


 


6.3.2 Observed average LGD 


178. To comply with the requirement of obtaining an LRA LGD in accordance with 
Article 
181(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions should calculate the observed average 
LGD under paragraphs 
147, 148, 154-157 and 160 of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD. When performing this calculation, institutions should follow the 
principles set out below. 
179. Under paragraph 
147 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, default 
observations that are triggered close to the time of the LGD estimation process 
(i.e. 
observations with a recent default when the LGD is being estimated) are 
part of the historical observation period and should be included in the RDS. 
Since for these recent defaults only limited information is available regarding 
the full recovery process, the treatment of incomplete recovery processes 
envisaged in paragraph 
158 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD is more 
complex and could add uncertainty to the LGD estimates. It is the ECB’s 
understanding that to mitigate this risk institutions may establish a minimum 
period of time during which the default should be observed in order for it to be 
considered in the calculation of the observed average LGD. This minimum 
period should be adequately justified and institutions should ensure that all 
relevant information regarding defaults observed for a shorter period (e.g. 
a 
change in the characteristics of defaults) is considered in the LGD estimates. In 
any case this period should not be longer than 12 
months. 



180. For the purposes of LGD estimation (and validation), long recovery processes 
are expected to be considered as closed under paragraph 
156 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD. The objective of defining the maximum period of 
the recovery process (“time-to-workout”) is to avoid situations where institutions 
give consideration to overly optimistic recoveries from open exposures that are 
already at a very advanced stage of the recovery process. To achieve this, the 
specification of the “time-to-workout” should be supported by evidence of the 
observed pace of recoveries and be consistent with the nature of the products 
concerned, the type of exposures and the operational recovery process. In 
addition, the institution should substantiate and clearly document the studies 
that support the formulation of the time-to-workout and should pay particular 
attention to the following. 
(a) The specific moment after the date of default at which nearly nil evolution 
of the average cumulative recovery rates is observed. For example, when 
the cumulative recovery curves show a pronounced increase after which 
they flatten out, the time spent in default after the significant increase 
occurs could be used directly as the time-to-workout, especially in the 
case of unsecured exposures. 
(b) The period of time after the date of default where the cumulative 
percentage of closed/recovered exposures flattens. 
(c) The number of exposures used to construct the curves referred to at 
letters (a) and (b) above, in order to identify situations where only a few 
cases contribute to the shape of the curves. 
(d) The expected recovery rate conditioned to vintages higher than the time-
to-workout. 
(e) For secured exposures, the share of exposures for which recoveries from 
collateral have not yet been realised. 





6.3.3 Treatment of incomplete recovery processes 


181. In order to obtain an LRA LGD in accordance with Article 
181(1)(a) of the CRR, 
institutions should ensure that the relevant information from incomplete 
recovery processes is taken into account in a conservative manner. For this 
purpose, institutions should analyse their incomplete recovery processes and 
extract the information relevant for LGD estimation under paragraphs 
153 to 
159 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. In addition, institutions should: 
(a) justify and document their methodology for the treatment of incomplete 
recovery processes, and in particular how they take into account 
paragraph 
159 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD; 
(b) for the purpose of paragraph 
159(a) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and 
LGD in particular, base the extrapolation of future recoveries on defaults 






arising from vintages (i.e. 
group of exposures which defaulted in a given 
period of time) for which, during the period already observed, similar 
average past recoveries have been realised on similar exposures; 
(c) in order to ensure transparency regarding the impact from the treatment of 
incomplete recovery processes, assess the sensitivity of the treatment with 
respect to the main assumptions. 





6.3.4 Recovery processes where collateral has been repossessed and 
not yet sold 


182. In specific cases where institutions have taken possession of but not yet sold 
the collateral, there is a risk that the value of repossession might not adequately 
reflect the value of the repossessed collateral. To mitigate this risk, institutions 
should estimate haircuts to the value of the collateral under paragraphs 
116 to 
118 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. In order to ensure transparency 
regarding the impact from the treatment of repossessed collateral, institutions 
should: 
(a) compare the estimated haircuts with the available observations regarding 
the repossession and subsequent sale of similar types of collateral; 
(b) assess the impact on the LRA LGD of the inclusion of the repossessed 
collateral by performing sensitivity analyses based on the application of 
different haircuts to the value of the collateral (at least, by applying a 
haircut of 100% to cases where collateral has been repossessed but not 
yet sold). 





6.3.5 Long-run average 


183. To comply with the requirement of obtaining an LRA LGD by facility grade or 
pool in accordance with Article 
181(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions should 
estimate LGDs under paragraphs 
100 and 149 to 164 of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD. When performing this estimation, institutions should follow the 
observations below. 
184. Under paragraph 
150 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions should 
calculate the LRA LGD as an arithmetic average of realised LGDs over a 
historical observation period weighted by a number of defaults. When 
performing this calculation, institutions should observe the following points. 
(a) In the event of definition of default applied at obligor level, where two 
facilities of the same obligor are assigned to the same facility grade or 
pool, institutions are expected to calculate the average realised LGD as 
follows: first take the exposure-weighted average realised LGD at the 
obligor level and then take the arithmetic average LGD weighted by the 
number of defaulted obligors within the LGD grade. If institutions use a 






different approach, they should demonstrate that there are no systematic 
deviations from the approach referred to above. 
(b) Under paragraph 
160 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, the realised 
LGD of each observation should be floored at zero for the purpose of LGD 
estimation. In cases where LGD estimates for specific facility grades or 
pools are low or even zero (in exceptional cases), in order to ensure that 
these estimates are accurate and not driven by (systematic) errors or 
distortions institutions should ensure that their estimation process is 
accurate. In particular, they should ensure that there is a sufficient number 
of observations supporting the estimate and that these outcomes are 
carefully monitored and scrutinised. 
(c) Under paragraph 
162 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, institutions 
should apply an appropriate treatment to extremely high values of realised 
LGDs much above 100%, at the level of data quality, risk drivers, 
assignment to grades or pools or assignment to calibration segments. To 
ensure that the estimates are accurate, institutions are not expected to cap 
realised LGD values (i.e. 
to replace the observed value by a pre-defined 
value when the observed value is above the pre-defined one). 
(a) For defaults in the RDS which are closed or considered closed, compare 
the realised LGD at facility level with the estimates of LGD. Separate tests 
should be performed for the LGD applied to the performing portfolio and 





185. Institutions can calibrate LGD estimates to the LRA LGD calculated at the level 
of the calibration segment under paragraph 
161(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD 
and LGD. When calibration segments are used for the purpose of LGD 
estimations, institutions are expected to base their decision on a sound 
rationale, in particular on quantitative evidence. It is the ECB’s understanding 
that, to comply with Article 
181(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions should also 
calculate the LRA LGD at a more granular level than the calibration segment 
(i.e. 
individual LGD grades or pools if estimation is discrete or ranges of LGD 
values if the estimation is continuous). The level should be appropriate for the 
application of the model. In addition, institutions should ensure that there are no 
systematic deviations when comparing the estimated LGDs with the LRA of 
realised LGDs at this more granular level, i.e. 
the direction of divergences 
should be random. 
186. Where the LGD is the result of a combination of different components (for 
example, secured and unsecured components), the calibration step according 
to paragraph 
185 (ensuring that the average realised LGD and the average 
estimated LGD across facilities within the same calibration segment/range of 
LGD values are aligned) is expected to be performed after the aggregation of 
the components. In addition, there is a risk that systematic deviations could be 
introduced to the estimation when combining these different components. In this 
case, the direction of divergences would not be random. To mitigate this risk, 
institutions should do the following. 



the LGD in-default. Analogous tests should be performed at component 
level. 
(b) In the case of models based on components with underlying data covering 
time windows with different lengths and/or periods for each of the 
components, ensure that no bias is introduced in the LGD estimates at 
facility level with respect to the LRA. The analysis referred to in point (a) 
should be performed, at least, for the available common time period. 
(a) There is a significant improvement in predictive power when using the 
more recent data with respect to the predictive power resulting from the 
use of an arithmetic average under paragraph 
150 of the EBA Guidelines 
on PD and LGD. This improvement would be evidenced by comparing the 
estimated LGDs for each grade with the average realised LGD covering as 
long a period as possible in accordance with Article 
185(b) of the CRR. 
(b) The oldest data are considered as non-representative as a result of 
specific policy or business changes in the bank, but not in order to reflect 
current trends in loss rates directly related to macroeconomic conditions. 
(c) The weighting approach is used in a consistent manner over time and any 
change in the applied weights of historical data is appropriately justified. 





187. Notwithstanding paragraph 
184, for retail exposures institutions need not give 
equal importance to historical data if more recent data are a better predictor of 
loss rates.84 It is the ECB’s understanding that an institution may consider the 
more recent data to be a better predictor of loss rates and may give more 
importance to recent historical data if its methodology is in line with 
paragraphs 
150 to 152 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD and if the 
following apply. 
188. In accordance with Article 
179(1)(a) of the CRR, an institution’s own estimates 
must incorporate all relevant data and must be derived using both historical 
experience and empirical evidence. To comply with these requirements, when 
institutions use external or pooled data to complement their own loss or 
recovery experience, they should ensure that LRA LGDs derived from external 
or pooled data are also calculated separately from, and compared with, those 
based on internal data85. In addition, the direction and magnitude of the 
differences between these averages should be properly analysed and 
documented when calibrating the model, including the adequacy of the MoC 
considered, and duly followed up in the review of estimates. 
189. Article 
179(1)(d) of the CRR requires, among other things, that the population of 
exposures represented in the data used for estimation, the lending standards 
used when the data were generated and other relevant characteristics must be 
comparable with those of the institution’s exposures and standards. 
Paragraph 
164 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD further specifies that 


84 
Article 
181(2), last paragraph, of the CRR. 


85 
Considering the maximum common period possible between the internal and external or pooled data. 



institutions should take into account not only the current characteristics of the 
portfolio but also, where relevant, any changes to the structure of the portfolio 
that are expected to happen in the foreseeable future. When institutions 
perform adjustments to their LGD estimates in order to comply with these 
requirements, it is the ECB’s understanding that the following principles should 
apply. 
(a) The adjustment should be based on a comparison of the data used in risk 
quantification with the institution’s application portfolio. In many 
circumstances (for example where a type of product has been 
discontinued by the institution), the addition of these characteristics as risk 
drivers for LGD estimation is the most simple and effective way of dealing 
with issues of non-representativeness. 
(b) In the event of changes in lending or recovery policies, institutions should 
make only conservative adjustments until they are able to provide 
empirical evidence concerning the impact of the new policies. Such 
evidence should be based on the inclusion in the RDS of data from 
periods more recent than the change of policy. 
(c) All economic and market conditions experienced in the past and reflected 
in historical observations should be considered by institutions as part of 
foreseeable economic and market conditions (paragraph 
147 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD). They are not, therefore, a reason to perform 
adjustments. 





6.3.6 Downturn LGD 


190. To obtain LGD estimates that are appropriate for an economic downturn in 
accordance with Article 
181(1)(b) of the CRR, institutions are expected to: 
(a) Characterise an economic downturn in accordance with the Commission 
Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2021/930; 
(b) derive LGD estimates which are appropriate for the downturn conditions 
specified, in accordance with the EBA Guidelines for the estimation of LGD 
appropriate for an economic downturn (“Downturn LGD estimation”). 






6.4 Estimation of ELBE and LGD in-default 


6.4.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 17 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

179 

(1)(c) 

181 

(1)(a), (h), (j) and (2) 
second sub-paragraph 

185 

(a) to (c) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

47 

 

48 

(c) 

51 

 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

165 to 193 



 


191. In accordance with Article 
181(1)(h) of the CRR, for the specific case of 
exposures already in default institutions must use the sum of their ELBE for each 
exposure, given current economic circumstances and exposure status and their 
estimate of the increased loss rate caused by possible additional unexpected 
losses during the recovery period. To comply with these requirements, 
institutions should estimate ELBE and LGD in-default under paragraphs 
165 to 
193 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD.86 In this process, institutions 
should follow the observations below. 
192. In accordance with Article 
181(1)(h) of the CRR, the ELBE must represent the 
best estimate of expected loss given current economic circumstances and 
exposure status. To comply with this requirement, it is the ECB’s understanding 
that institutions should take into consideration the economic conditions 
expected over the period of the recovery process, and in particular reflect 
downturn conditions in the ELBE, if and only if current economic conditions are 
in a downturn or a downturn is expected over the period of the recovery 
process. This can be done by adding the relevant macroeconomic and 
economic factors as drivers of the ELBE model, as would be the case for models 
complying with any condition of paragraph 184 of the EBA Guidelines on PD 
and LGD, or by adjusting the LRA as referred to in paragraph 
185 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD. Furthermore, in accordance with paragraph 184 of 
the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, if any of the conditions referred to in that 
paragraph is met (i.e. the model includes directly at least one macroeconomic 
factor as a risk driver, or at least one material risk driver is sensitive to 
economic conditions, or the realised LGD for defaulted exposures is not 


86 
In accordance with paragraph 177 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, for the purpose of ELBE and 
LGD in-default estimation, institutions should analyse the potential risk drivers referred to in paragraph 
121 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, not only until the moment of default but also after the date 
of default and until the date of termination of the recovery process. For the purposes of ELBE and LGD-
in default estimation, this should include climate-related and environmental risk drivers where those risk 
drivers are assessed as relevant and material. 



sensitive to the relevant economic factors), then in the ECB’s understanding, 
the ELBE estimated on the basis of the LRA LGD reflects current economic 
circumstances as required by Article 181(1)(h) of the CRR and hence no further 
adjustments to the LRA LGD should be performed by institutions to reflect 
current economic circumstances. This means that, in the ECB’s understanding, 
where paragraph 184 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD applies, the ELBE 
estimates should not deviate from the LRA LGD if the argument for the 
deviation is based on economic conditions. It is the ECB’s understanding that 
institutions should appropriately account for paragraph 184 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD when back-testing their ELBE estimates in 
accordance with paragraph 170 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. To this 
end, where one of the conditions of paragraph 184 is met, the evolution of the 
ELBE estimates over time should be in accordance with that of the average 
realised LGD for defaulted exposures, although the variability of the ELBE time 
series may be lower than that of the average realised LGD for defaulted 
exposures. 
193. Under paragraph 
193 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, LGD in-default 
can be estimated directly or as the sum of ELBE and an add-on capturing the 
unexpected loss related to the exposures in default that may occur during the 
recovery period. In particular, the following should be taken into consideration. 
(a) The use of a constant value for unexpected losses for all defaulted 
exposures is not risk sensitive. In the ECB’s understanding, therefore, it 
does not allow an accurate assessment of risk. Where an institution does 
use a constant value, it should justify this. It should demonstrate that the 
constant value in question is an adequate estimate of all the components 
of unexpected loss envisaged in paragraph 
193(b) of the EBA Guidelines 
on PD and LGD during the remaining recovery period, i.e. 
between the 
date for which estimates are being applied and the final closure of the 
recovery process. This analysis should be performed at least for every 
calibration segment. 
(b) LGD in-default estimates are generally expected to be higher than ELBE 
estimates and only equal for duly justified individual exposures, which are 
expected to be very limited. 






7 Conversion factors 


7.1 Commitments, unadvised limits and scope of application 


7.1.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 18 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

4 

(1)(56) 

151 

(7), (8) 

166 

(1) to (8)(a), (b), (c), (d), (10) 



 


194. In accordance with Article 
151(7) and (8) of the CRR, institutions must use own 
estimates of CCFs for the retail exposure class. If they have received 
permission to use own estimates for the corporate, institutional, central 
government and central bank exposure classes, they must again use own 
estimates of CCFs, instead of the conversion factors set out in in 
Article 
166(8)(a) to (d) of the CRR. In both cases (retail and non-retail exposure 
classes), the scope of CCF modelling is, in the ECB’s understanding, limited to 
the off-balance sheet items referred to in Article 
166(8) of the CRR.87 The 
treatment of off-balance-sheet items other than those mentioned in 
Article 
166(1) to (8) of the CRR is specified in Article 
166(10). In accordance 
with Article 
166(10) of the CRR, an exposure value must be a specific 
percentage of an off-balance-sheet item’s value, based on the classification of 
off-balance-sheet items established in Annex 
I of the CRR. 
195. Conversion factor means the ratio of the currently undrawn amount of a 
commitment that could be drawn and that would therefore be outstanding at 
default to the currently undrawn amount of the commitment. The extent of the 
commitment is determined by the advised limit, unless the unadvised limit is 
higher.88 The exposure value for the items listed in Article 
166(8) of the CRR 
must be calculated as the committed but undrawn amount multiplied by a 
CCF.89 To calculate the exposure value as required by Article 
166(8) of the 
CRR, institutions should adopt the following approach. 
(a) Treat a facility as an exposure from the earliest date at which the facility is 
recorded in the institution’s systems in a way that would allow the obligor 
to make a drawing. An unadvised limit is any credit limit defined by the 
institution (i) 
that is above the limit the obligor has been informed of by the 





87 
The understanding of the ECB is also supported by EBA Single Rulebook Q&A, 
Question 
ID: 
2014_1263. 


88 
Article 
4(1)(56) of the CRR. 


89 
Article 
166(8) of the CRR. 



institution; and (ii) 
according to which additional drawings are possible, at 
least temporarily. This higher (unadvised) credit limit may be disregarded if 
its availability is subject to a further credit assessment by the institution, as 
long as this additional assessment includes a re-rating or a confirmation of 
the rating of the obligor. 
(b) Consider as “commitment” any contractual arrangement that has been 
offered by the institution and accepted by the obligor to extend credit, 
purchase assets or issue credit substitutes. 
(c) Consider as “conditionally cancellable commitment” any such arrangement 
that can be and will be cancelled by the institution if the obligor fails to 
meet conditions set out in the facility documentation, including conditions 
that must be met by the obligor prior to any initial or subsequent drawdown 
under the arrangement. 
(d) Consider as “credit lines” all lines including products such as facilities 
granted for construction where the payments to the obligor are made 
according to the progress of the construction. Products such as 
guarantees are not, however, included in the concept of credit lines. 


196. For institutions not using own estimates of CCFs for exposures to corporates, 
institutions, central governments and central banks, Article 
166(8) of the CRR 
defines the CCFs to be used for the purpose of calculating RWEA. In 
accordance with Article 
166(8)(a) and (c) of the CRR, institutions not using their 
own estimates of CCFs for non-retail exposures are permitted to apply a 0% 
CCF, under certain conditions. 


It is the ECB’s understanding that, to comply with the conditions established 
under Article 
166(8)(a) and (c) of the CRR and to apply a 0% CCF, institutions 
should have in place internal control systems that allow them to monitor the 
obligor’s financial condition and to act in the event that a deterioration in the 
obligor’s credit quality is detected. They should also be able to provide evidence 
that the internal control systems work effectively. For this purpose, institutions 
should demonstrate that there is only a very limited number of exposures of a 
particular type observed during the previous year for which the EAD is higher 
than the drawn amount at the reference date. This analysis should be 
performed on a regular basis. The ECB considers it good practice when 
institutions perform this analysis on an annual basis. 



7.2 Realised CCFs 


7.2.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 19 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

175 

(3) 

176 

(4) 

178 

(1) 

179 

 

182 

(1)(a) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

54 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

EBA Guidelines on DoD 

18/01/2017 

 

16 



 


197. To ensure that a consistent and accurate approach is adopted to calculate the 
realised CCFs, institutions should have in place sufficiently detailed policies and 
procedures. For institutions to comply with the data-related requirements set out 
in Article 
176(4) of the CRR, their RDS: 
(a) should not be capped at the principal amount outstanding or at facility 
limits; 
(b) should include all credit obligations (paragraph 
16 of the EBA Guidelines 
on DoD), especially accrued interest, other due payments (e.g. 
fees) and 
limit excesses. 



198. In accordance with Article 
182(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions must calculate the 
realised CCF at facility level for each default. In cases where realised LGD is 
calculated at a more aggregated level than single facility level, as described in 
paragraph 
150 above, CCF estimation can be performed at facility level or at 
the LGD aggregation level. One such example is where CCF is estimated by 
facility while several facilities are aggregated for LGD purposes, since they are 
all secured by the same collateral. In this case, institutions should: 
(a) for retail exposures where they use the definition of default at facility level 
in accordance with the last paragraph of Article 
178(1) of the CRR, apply 
full contagion of default across aggregated facilities; 
(b) ensure consistency between estimation and application of the parameters; 
(c) ensure that no bias results from the aggregation of facilities by validation 
of the estimates (PD, LGD, CCF) also at the more aggregated level. 






199. For the purposes of Article 
182(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions must compute 
realised CCF. To comply with this requirement, in the understanding of the ECB 
institutions should adopt the following approach. 
(a) Calculate realised CCF as the ratio of the difference between the EAD and 
the exposure at the reference date in the numerator, and the difference 
between the limit at reference date and the exposure at reference date 
(i.e. 
the amount available to be drawn at the reference date) in the 
denominator. This does not mean that, to address the issues with the 
“region of instability”, institutions may not use direct EAD realisation (as 
referred to in paragraph 
207(a) of this chapter). In any case, all the 
requirements regarding CCF risk quantification referred to in the applicable 
regulation apply, together with the ECB’s understanding of those 
requirements as set out in paragraphs 0, 204, 205, 206 and 210(b) of this 
chapter. 
(b) Ensure that the definition of exposure is identical to the one used for LGD 
estimation. In particular, treatment of post-default drawings should be 
identical for the exposures used in both the LGD and CCF estimations. 
Discounted additional drawings are expected to be included in CCF when 
they are included in the LGD denominator. See also paragraph 
152(a) 
above. 
(c) For each reference date and in cases where the same facility defaults 
more than once during the observation period, consider as the date of 
default relevant for CCF purposes the date of the first default. 





7.3 CCF structure 


7.3.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 20 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

170 

 

172 

(1)(b), (2) 

174 

 

175 

(4) 

182 

 



 


200. A grade or pool is understood by the ECB to be the subset of facilities to which 
the same CCF is applied for the calculation of regulatory capital requirements, 
irrespective of how this CCF has been assigned. 



201. To comply with the requirements for the structure of the CCF models 
established in Article 
170 of the CRR, and particularly when considering the risk 
drivers envisaged by paragraph 
(4) of that Article, institutions should follow 
these principles: 
(a) Demonstrate a detailed understanding of the impact on the CCF model of 
changes in customer product mix or characteristics that take place 
between reference and default dates and the materiality of that impact. If 
the impact is material, institutions should address it within their own 
estimation process. This is because changes in exposure characteristics 
(e.g. 
a change in the value of the limit) or “product profile transformations” 
(e.g. 
a revolving loan that has been converted into a term loan or vice 
versa) which commonly occur between reference and default dates can 
impact the CCF model. 
(b) Although the reference date for the calculation of realised CCF should be 
up to 12 
months prior to default, institutions should analyse risk drivers 
considering information not only at the reference date but also before that 
date whenever relevant. In assessing whether the use of information from 
before the reference date is relevant, institutions should take into account 
the volatility of the risk driver over time. 
(c) Ensure that the models reflect the institution’s current policies and 
strategies regarding account monitoring, including limit monitoring, and 
payment processing. 



202. Where an institution relies on one or more statistical models to define the 
process of assigning exposures to facility grades or pools (or parts of this 
process) in accordance with Article 175(4)(b) of the CRR, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that for institutions to comply with the requirement, set out in 
Article 144(1)(a) of the CRR, that rating systems should provide for a 
meaningful differentiation of risk as further explained in letters (c) and (e) of 
Article 30(3) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439, the 
statistical process followed by the institution in selecting its model(s) should 
include assessing the performance of the model(s) on the basis of independent 
datasets (data points which were left out of the model fitting) in a way that limits 
the risk of overfitting. Independent datasets should correspond not only to 
random sampling (out-of-sample), but also to different time periods (out-of-time) 
unless there are no sufficient data available for the training sample. The 
expectations set out above in this paragraph are specifically related to the 
model development phase. Once the process for assigning exposures to facility 
grades or pools has been defined, the requirements related to the framework 
for the review of estimates under paragraphs 217 to 221 of the EBA Guidelines 
on PD and LGD (which are also relevant for the CCF estimation, according to 
paragraph 212 of this guide) apply, together with the expectations set out in 
Section 9 of this guide. In particular, in accordance with paragraph 218(b)(i) of 
the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, the institution must carry out an analysis 
to identify any potential deterioration in the model’s performance, including the 



model’s discriminatory power, by comparing its performance at the time of the 
development with its performance over each subsequent observation period. 


7.4 CCF risk quantification 


7.4.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 21 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

144 

(1)(a) 

166 

(8) 

169 

(3) 

182 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
2022/439 

20/10/2021 

53 to 56 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
2021/930 

01/03/2021 

 

 



 


203. The exposure value for undrawn commitments is calculated as the committed 
but undrawn amount multiplied by a CCF.90 CCFs can also be derived from 
direct estimates (for example by modelling total facility EAD) in accordance with 
Article 
169(3) of the CRR. In this case, and in order to comply with 
Article 
182(1)(a) of the CRR, it is the ECB’s understanding that institutions 
should also calculate the LRA CCF at a level more granular than calibration 
segment that is appropriate for the application of the model, namely using 
individual CCF values if estimation is discrete or sub-ranges of CCF values if 
estimation is continuous. In addition, institutions should ensure that there are no 
systematic deviations when comparing the estimated CCFs with the LRA 
realised CCFs in sub-ranges. In other words, the direction of divergences 
should be random. 
204. In accordance with Article 
182(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions are required to 
calculate the default weighted LRA CCF separately for each facility grade or 
pool. To comply with this requirement, institutions should adopt the following 
approach. 
(a) Ensure that the historical observation period is as broad as possible and 
contains data from different periods characterised by different economic 
circumstances, including bad years as reflected in economic indicators 
that are relevant for the type of exposures considered. 
(b) Calculate the observed average CCF for each facility grade or pool on all 
defaults observed in the historical observation period. Institutions should 





90 
Article 
166(8) of the CRR. 



apply an appropriate treatment to extremely high values of realised CCF 
much above 100%, at the level of data quality, risk drivers, assignment to 
grades or pools or assignment to calibration segments. To ensure that the 
estimates are accurate, it is the ECB’s understanding that institutions are 
not expected to cap realised CCF values. In other words, they are not 
expected to replace the observed value by a pre-defined value when the 
observed value is above the pre-defined one. 
(a) There is a significant improvement in predictive power when using the 
more recent data compared with the predictive power resulting from the 
use of an arithmetic average. This improvement can be evidenced by 
comparing the estimated CCFs for each grade with the average realised 
CCF covering as long a period as possible, as set out in Article 
185(b) of 
the CRR. 
(b) The oldest data are considered as non-representative as a result of 
specific policy or business changes in the bank, but not in order to reflect 



(c) When the historical observation period is considered to be representative 
of the LRA, the average realised CCFs should be computed as the 
arithmetic average of the yearly averages of realised CCFs in that period. 
(d) When the historical observation period is not considered to be 
representative of the LRA: 
(i) if bad years are under-represented in the historical observation 
period, the observed average CCF should be adjusted upwards in 
order to estimate an LRA CCF; 
(ii) if bad years are over-represented in the historical observation period, 
the observed average CCF may be adjusted to estimate an LRA CCF 
where there is a significant correlation between the economic 
indicators referred to in paragraph 
190(a) and the available observed 
CCF. 



(e) It is the ECB’s understanding that, where CCF estimates for specific facility 
grades or pools are low or even zero (in exceptional cases) before the 
MoC is applied, and in order to ensure that these estimates are accurate 
and not driven by (systematic) errors or distortions, institutions should 
ensure that their estimation process is pertinent and accurate. In particular, 
they should ensure that, in these specific facility grades or pools, there is 
only a very limited number of exposures for which the exposure at the 
moment of default is higher than the drawn amount at the reference date, 
and that these outcomes are carefully monitored and scrutinised. 


205. Notwithstanding paragraph 
204, for retail exposures an institution need not give 
equal importance to historical data if more recent data are a better predictor of 
drawdowns. In the ECB’s understanding, an institution may consider that the 
more recent data are a better predictor of drawdowns and may give more 
importance to recent historical data if the following apply. 



current trends in realised CCFs directly related to macroeconomic 
conditions. 
(c) The weighting approach is used in a consistent manner over time and any 
change in the applied weights of historical data is appropriately justified. 
(a) A common issue in estimating CCFs concerns facilities close to being fully 
drawn at the relevant reference date, as a result of the instability that may 
be observed in the estimates (also known as “region of instability”). To 
mitigate this risk, institutions should ensure that their CCF model is robust 
and provides estimates that are effectively protected against undesirable 
issues caused by the “region of instability” and/or that their estimates are 
adjusted adequately. 
(b) Articles 179 and 
182 of the CRR lay down the requirements for CCF 
quantification. In some cases, institutions define CCF values which are 
mostly based on judgemental considerations. The ECB understands this 
approach to be compliant with the requirements if all the following 
conditions are met. 
(i) The exposures to which such CCFs are applied are not material. 
(ii) The data available are scarce to a degree that prevents the institution 
from obtaining sufficient relevant statistical evidence from them. 
(iii) In accordance with Article 179(1)(a) and 179(1)(f) of the CRR, where 
data availability is considered to be unsatisfactory, the MoC must be 
larger, and the less data an institution has, the more conservative its 
estimation should be. The institution should provide evidence that, in 
accordance with (a) the internal data available, (b) the contractual 
terms of the exposures to which the value is applied, and (c) the 
institution’s policies and processes, the CCF value defined is an 
objectively conservative CCF estimate (and, in particular, is 
appropriate for an economic downturn and includes a sufficient MoC). 








206. To comply with the requirements of Article 
182(1)(b) and to have CCF estimates 
that are appropriate for an economic downturn, institutions should characterise 
an economic downturn in accordance with Commission Delegated Regulation 
(EU) No 2021/930. To this end, an impact assessment should be performed to 
identify which identified downturn period is most strongly evidenced by elevated 
levels of realised CCFs. Any lag between the downturn period and the date of 
the impact on the realised CCFs should be taken into account. This means that 
where high levels of realised CCFs are not experienced simultaneously with the 
downturn periods, but nevertheless result from it, these high CCFs should be 
considered as the CCFs appropriate for the economic downturn. 
207. In order to ensure a meaningful assessment of transaction characteristics, as 
required by Article 
144(1)(a) of the CRR, particular attention should be given to 
the following observations. 



As a consequence, a minimum value of 100% must be applied as a 
CCF estimate. 
(iv) As part of the framework for the review of estimates of the CCF 
model, the institution ensures that the above three conditions 
continue to be met. With respect to point (iii) above, it must be 
ensured that the applied values remain conservative over time by 
comparing them with the realised CCFs of each defaulted facility 
within the subset of exposures to which such values are applied as a 
CCF estimate. 








8 Model-related MoC 


8.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 22 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

179 

(1)(f) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

44 

 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

36 to 52, 92(b) 



 


208. Institutions must add to their estimates an MoC that is related to the expected 
range of estimation errors.91 To comply with this requirement, institutions are 
expected to follow paragraphs 
36 to 52 of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
The ECB understands that the MoC must reflect the uncertainty at the level of 
the final PD estimates (namely, at the level of the grade or pool). It is also the 
ECB’s understanding that the MoC should not affect the rank ordering. 
Institutions should be able to ensure monotonicity in their final estimates while 
still reflecting the uncertainty at grade or pool level. In accordance with 
paragraph 37(a) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, the MoC should 
consider any deficiencies stemming from missing or inaccurate information 
including, where relevant and material, any missing or inaccurate climate-
related information considered in risk estimates. 
209. Since the MoC requirements laid down by the CRR also apply in cases where 
institutions estimate CCFs, paragraph 
208 is also relevant in such cases. 
210. In the understanding of the ECB, to reflect the dispersion of the statistical 
estimators as set out in paragraph 
43(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD, 
institutions should adopt the following approach. 


91 
Article 
179(1)(f) of the CRR. 



(a) For PD, estimate an MoC to account for statistical uncertainty/sampling 
error affecting the LRA estimate at grade/pool level. This MoC should be 
based on the distribution of the estimator, which is the average of one-year 
default rates of the grade/pool across time (i.e. 
the distribution of 
(ΣDRt)T⁄), considering that the uncertainty is primarily driven by the 
statistical uncertainty of each one-year default rate and the length of the 
time series. As a result, it is expected that the lower the number of 
observations per grade and the shorter the time series are, the higher the 
MoC of the grade should be. 
(b) Similarly, for LGD and CCF, estimate an MoC to account for statistical 
uncertainty/sampling error affecting the final estimates. This MoC should 
be defined on the basis of the distribution of the estimators, considering 
that their uncertainty is primarily driven by the statistical uncertainty of the 
observations used to compute the long-run and downturn estimates and 
the length of the time series. 





Institutions need to be aware of and deal adequately with the dependency 
between default rates over time on the quantification of the MoC, 
e.g. 
when using overlapping windows for the calculation of default rates. 


The above principles also apply for institutions using direct PD estimates 
and for institutions calibrating the LRA default rate at the level of the 
calibration segment, as referred to in paragraph 
92(b) of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD. When using direct PD estimates, the MoC is 
based on the distribution of this direct PD estimator (which includes the 
risk differentiation function), implicitly reflecting the uncertainty of the LRA. 
When calibration is performed at calibration segment level, the general 
estimation error may be computed at that level when the statistical 
uncertainty/sampling error is neither significantly different across grades or 
PD sub-ranges nor significantly different between the calibration segment 
level and the grades or PD sub-ranges level. 



9 Review of estimates 


9.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 23 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

172 

(3) 

174 

(e) 

179 

(1)(a), (c) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
2022/439 

20/10/2021 

35 

(2) 

43 

 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 

20/11/2017 

 

217 to 221 



 


211. Institutions must review their estimates whenever new information comes to 
light but at least on an annual basis.92 To comply with this requirement, they are 
expected to have in place a framework under paragraphs 
217 to 221 of the EBA 
Guidelines on PD and LGD. 
212. Since the review of estimates requirements under the CRR also apply in cases 
where an institution estimates CCFs, paragraph 
211 is also relevant to such 
cases. 
213. In the ECB’s understanding and for the purposes of paragraph 
211, the 
following principles apply. 
(a) For PD models and regarding the analysis of the predictive power 
envisaged by paragraph 
218(c) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD: 
(i) the analysis should be performed at grade level; for institutions using 
direct PD estimates, it should be performed at a sufficient level of 
granularity; 
(ii) institutions should use a range of metrics to assess predictive ability, 
including statistical tests and graphical analysis of the evolution of 
default rates and PD. 



(b) The analysis referred to in paragraph 
218(c)(i) of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD should also consider, for CCFs, whether including the most 
recent data leads to a significant change in the LRA CCF or downturn 
CCF. 
(c) For LGD models that result from a combination of different components 
(for example, secured and unsecured components), the back-testing 





92 
Article 
179(1)(c) of the CRR. 



analysis referred to in paragraph 
218(c)(ii) of the EBA Guidelines on PD 
and LGD should be run at both component and facility level. 
(d) In addition, institutions should consider in their frameworks for the review 
of estimates the availability of data for different exposure types, taking into 
account the specificities of the model architecture, including the existing 
and potential risk drivers, under paragraph 
220 of the EBA Guidelines on 
PD and LGD. When data are scarce, they should use complementary 
analyses for those exposure types where quantitative measures prove 
inconclusive as a result, for example, of the low number of exposures 
available. 
(e) Where internal data are not considered sufficient to establish fixed targets 
and tolerances for defined metrics and tools to assess the performance of 
the PD model in terms of risk differentiation, institutions should define and 
put in place the appropriate actions to address this.93 These actions could 
encompass, for example, the use of complementary analyses for those 
cases where the results for the application of metrics and tools are proven 
to be inconclusive. 
(f) When external credit bureau scores or ratings are used as the main (or 
one of the main) driver(s) of the internal rating, in cases where significant 
changes are applied to the credit bureau scoring institutions should 
consider the possibility of adjusting their internal data following the 
changes applied to the score, and whenever the input variables are no 
longer considered appropriate in their credit rating process. 


214. In the case of material models where the assignment of the grade is based on a 
statistical model and where there is a risk that slight changes in the ranking of 
the obligors, or in the boundaries between grades, could lead to significant 
changes in the RWEA in that portfolio, the framework referred to in 
paragraph 
211 should also include an analysis of whether the inclusion of the 
most recent data in the RDS used for model development would lead to 
materially different model outcomes. This analysis should be conducted on a 
three-yearly basis, or more often, depending on the materiality of the model. 
The analysis should consider, in particular, whether the discriminatory power of 
the PD, LGD or CCF models would be materially increased when re-estimating 
the model parameters on the basis of the updated RDS. Portfolios should be 
considered as falling into this category when, for example: (i) 
a limited number 
of obligors represent an important share of the total exposure; or (ii) 
exposures 
are concentrated near the boundaries between two grades. 
215. When the number of default observations is low, to analyse whether the main 
drivers of the observed defaults are appropriately reflected in the model in 
accordance with Article 
179(1)(a) of the CRR94 institutions should analyse 
individual defaults (or at least a sample of them where the number of defaults 


93 
As set out in Article 
35(2) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439. 


94 
This article requires that estimates be based on the material drivers of the respective risk parameters. 



makes analysing all of them unduly burdensome). However, the model should 
not be adapted simply to fit singular events from the institution’s file review. 
216. In accordance with Article 
172(3) of the CRR, for grade and pool assignments 
institutions must document those situations in which human judgement may 
override the inputs or outputs of the assignment process. In addition, institutions 
must complement the statistical model by human judgement and human 
oversight to review model-based assignments and ensure that the models are 
used appropriately.95 Furthermore, review procedures must be designed to find 
and limit errors associated with model weaknesses.96 To comply with these 
requirements, institutions should assess the impact of the application of human 
judgement on risk differentiation capability (e.g. 
on discriminatory power), under 
paragraph 
218(b) of the EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD. 


95 
Article 
174(e) of the CRR. 


96 
Article 
174(e) of the CRR. 


10 Calculation of maturity for non-retail exposures 


10.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 24 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

162 

(2)(f), (3) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 

20/10/2021 

70 

(d)(i), (ii) 



 


217. For the cases described in Article 
162(2)(f) of the CRR, the maturity parameter 
(M) must be the maximum remaining time (in years) that the obligor is permitted 
to take to fully discharge its contractual obligations. In the ECB’s understanding, 
M should be calculated using the expiry date of a facility. The repayment date of 
a current drawn amount should not be used. 
218. To ensure that the calculation of the maturity parameter is correct and to avoid 
any possible errors, for the purposes of Article 
162(3) of the CRR institutions 
should adequately justify and document any exemptions from the one-year 
maturity floor.



Market risk 


1 Scope of the market risk chapter 


1. The purpose of this chapter is to provide transparency on how the ECB 
understands a number of topics related to internal models used in the 
calculation of own funds requirements for market risk. It is important to note that 
this chapter does not aim to cover exhaustively all topics that could be subject 
to review during internal model investigations (such as, for example, model 
governance). The topics covered in the market risk chapter have been selected 
taking into account the requirements of the Capital Requirements Regulation 
(CRR) and focus on certain modelling aspects relating, for example, to 
regulatory back-testing of value-at-risk (VaR) models, to VaR and stressed VaR 
(sVaR) methodologies, and to the incremental default and migration risk charge 
(IRC) methodology. 



2 Scope of the internal model approach 


2.1 Regulatory references 


Table 25 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

4 

(1) 

6 

(1) 

7 

 

11 

(1) 

18 

 

92 

(3), (4) 

103 

(1) 

104 

 

106 

(1) 

325b,349 

 

350 

(1), (2) 

352 

(2), (3) 

353 

(3) 

362, 363 

 

364 

(2) 

367 

(2), (3) 

368, 370, 372 

 

382 

(4) 

386 

(1), (3) 

Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality of 
extensions and changes of the IMA1 

04/03/2015 

 

 

SSM Regulation2 

15/10/2013 

10 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

EBA Guidelines on the IRC3 

16/05/2012 

 

4, 7 

Final draft RTS on assessment methodology for IMA 
and significant share4 

22/11/2016 

Section 2, recital (20) 



1 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/942 amending Delegated Regulation (EU) No 
529/2014 
supplementing Regulation (EU) No 
575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards 
regulatory technical standards for assessing the materiality of extensions and changes of internal 
approaches when calculating own funds requirements for market risk (OJ L 
154, 19.6.2015, p. 
1) 
referred to in this guide as the “Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality of extensions and 
changes of the IMA”. 


2 
Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European 
Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions (OJ L 287, 
29.10.2013, p. 63), referred to in this guide as the “SSM Regulation”. 


3 
EBA Guidelines on the Incremental Default and Migration Risk Charge (IRC) (EBA/GL/2012/3), referred 
to in this guide as the “EBA Guidelines on the IRC”. 


4 
EBA Final draft Regulatory Technical Standards on the specification of the assessment methodology 
for competent authorities regarding compliance of an institution with the requirements to use internal 
models for market risk and assessment of significant share under points (b) and (c) of Article 
363(4) of 
Regulation (EU) No 
575/2013 (EBA/RTS/2016/07), referred to in this guide as the “Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share”. 


 



Once adopted by the European Commission, the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share will become an additional relevant 
regulatory reference. Currently that document only exists in a final draft version. 

2.2 Delimitation of the regulatory trading book 


2. According to Article 
4(1)(86) of the CRR, “trading book” means all positions in 
financial instruments and commodities held by an institution either with trading 
intent, or in order to hedge positions held with trading intent in accordance with 
Article 104 of the CRR. 
3. In accordance with Article 
104 of the CRR, institutions must have clearly 
defined policies and procedures for determining which positions to include in 
the trading book for the purpose of calculating their capital requirements 
(referred to in this guide as the “regulatory trading book”). The ECB considers 
that, in this context and in accordance with Article 4(1)(86) of the CRR, 
“positions” refers to positions in financial instruments (as defined in Article 
4(1)(50) of the CRR) and commodities, and not to risk positions as referred to in 
the glossary included in this guide. The ECB understands that positions that are 
classified as “held for trading” for accounting purposes are presumed to be 
included in the regulatory trading book. Therefore, institutions should be able to 
list all positions that are classified as “held for trading” for accounting purposes 
but not included in the regulatory trading book, and should be able to justify 
these exclusions. 
4. As the instruments and transactions are included either in the regulatory trading 
book or in the non-regulatory trading book (referred to in this guide as the 
“banking book”), the ECB understands that the policies required by Article 
104 
of the CRR should also encompass rules for moving instruments between the 
regulatory trading book and the banking book. 
5. In order for the ECB to assess the appropriateness and implementation of the 
policies and procedures for determining which positions to include in the 
regulatory trading book, the ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM 
Regulation, require institutions to provide a list of types of positions and 
instruments allocated to the regulatory trading or the banking book, identify all 
related transactions including their relevant characteristics, and justify such 
allocation. 
6. In view of their nature in terms of trading intent, the ECB considers that the 
following types of instruments and transactions are expected to be included in 
the regulatory trading book: 
(a) instruments in the correlation trading portfolio; 
(b) instruments resulting from securities underwriting commitments; 






(c) instruments held as accounting trading assets or liabilities (“held for 
trading” assets and liabilities);5 
(d) instruments resulting from market-making activities; 
(e) listed equities (other than equity investment funds); 
(f) trading-related repo-style transactions (repo-style transactions that are 
(i) 
entered into for liquidity management purposes and are (ii) 
valued at 
accrual for accounting purposes, are not presumed to be trading-related); 
(g) instruments that would give rise to net short risk positions6 for equity risk 
or credit risk in the banking book; 
(h) options including bifurcated embedded derivatives7 from instruments 
issued out of the banking book that relate to credit or equity risk. 
(a) unlisted equities; 
(b) instruments designated for securitisation warehousing; 
(c) real estate holdings; 
(d) retail credit and credit to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs); 
(e) other types of credit; 
(f) equity investments in a fund for which the institution cannot obtain daily 
price quotes;8 
(g) derivative instruments that have any of the types of instrument mentioned 
in points (a) to (f) as an underlying asset; 
(h) instruments held for the purpose of hedging a particular risk of a position in 
any of the types of instrument mentioned in points (a) to (g). 





7. In view of their nature in terms of trading intent, the ECB considers that the 
following types of instruments and positions are expected be included in the 
banking book: 


5 
Under IFRS 
9, these instruments would be held within a trading business model and would be 
accounted for at fair value though the profit and loss (P&L) account. 


6 
An institution will have a net short risk position for equity risk or credit risk if the present value of the 
position increases when an equity price decreases or when the credit spread of an issuer or group of 
issuers of debt increases. 


7 
Bifurcation means the separation of a derivative that is embedded in a hybrid security and that has to 
be separated according to accounting rules from the host security, and which has to be accounted for 
using the accounting rules for derivatives. 


8 
Where an institution is aware of the underlying investments of the fund on a daily basis, the underlying 
investments might be assigned to the trading or banking book depending on their characteristics, 
irrespective of the availability of daily price quotes for the fund itself. 



8. In addition, for each category listed in paragraphs 
6 and 7, institutions should 
be able to indicate to what extent the corresponding positions are included 
within the scope of the internal model approach (IMA). 
9. In accordance with Article 
106(1) of the CRR, internal hedges (as defined in 
Article 
4(1)(96) of the CRR) must be properly documented and not be primarily 
intended to avoid or reduce own funds requirements. Therefore, institutions 
should be able to identify9 all internal hedges and should document their 
treatment for the purpose of calculating own funds requirements for market risk. 
In accordance with Article 
106(1)(d) of the CRR, the market risk that is 
generated by an internal hedge must be dynamically managed in the regulatory 
trading book within the authorised limits. For this reason, the ECB considers 
that proper documentation should distinguish between 
(a) hedges of a banking book credit risk exposure (or counterparty credit risk 
exposure) using an internal risk transfer with the regulatory trading book; 
(b) hedges of a banking book equity risk exposure using a hedging instrument 
purchased from the market through the regulatory trading book; 
(c) hedges of a banking book interest rate risk exposure using an internal risk 
transfer with the regulatory trading book; 
(d) hedges of a banking book foreign exchange risk exposure using an 
internal risk transfer with the regulatory trading book; 
(e) hedges of a banking book commodity risk exposure using an internal risk 
transfer with the regulatory trading book; 
(f) eligible hedges (as defined in Article 
386(1) of the CRR) that are included 
in the credit valuation adjustment (CVA) capital charge. 





9 
To “identify” here means to be able to spot these trades among the institution’s transactions. The 
institution is not required to be able to segregate internal hedges in dedicated portfolios on which 
specific analysis is carried out. 


10 
For example, transactions within the scope of the IMA made between two trading units. 


Additionally, institutions should be able to identify internal transactions which 
are in the regulatory trading book10 and within the scope of the internal model, 
and show that these transactions do not contribute to the own funds 
requirements obtained using the internal model. 


10. In accordance with Article 
386(3) of the CRR, eligible CVA hedges that are 
included in the calculation of the own funds requirements for CVA risk must not 
be included in the calculation of the own funds requirements for specific risk of 
debt instruments. The ECB therefore considers that they should be included in 
the scope of calculation of own funds requirements for general risk (for 
example, included in the VaR and sVaR, or treated through the framework for 
risks-not-in-the-VaR or sVaR engine 
– see Section 
7). Additionally, other 
(i.e. 
non-eligible) CVA hedges in the regulatory trading book should be included 
in the calculation of own funds requirements for market risk (i.e. 
general and 



specific risk). The ECB considers that this also applies to CVA hedges for 
counterparties which are exempted from the own funds requirement for CVA 
risk in accordance with Article 382(4) of the CRR. 
11. In accordance with Article 
362 of the CRR, position risk on a traded debt 
instrument may be divided into two components: specific risk and general risk. 
In accordance with the same article, general risk of traded debt instruments 
refers to the risk of a price change due to a change in the level of interest rates. 
The ECB considers that this is a reference to risk-free interest rates and does 
not include counterparty credit spread risk (i.e. the risk of a price change due to 
a change in the credit spread of the counterparty to a transaction). In 
accordance with the same article, specific risk of debt instruments refers to the 
risk of a price change due to factors related to its issuer or, in the case of a 
derivative, the issuer of the underlying instrument. The ECB considers that this 
definition of specific risk does not include counterparty credit spread risk. 
Consistent with this interpretation, the ECB considers that counterparty credit 
spread risk does not fall under the definition of either general or specific risk, 
cannot be included in the scope of the IMA and is not part of the actual or 
hypothetical profit and loss (P&L) for back-testing. 
12. Back-to-back transactions in the regulatory trading book (i.e. 
transactions 
exactly matched with a third-party transaction) are generally included in the 
calculation of own funds requirements for market risk. The ECB considers that 
back-to-back transactions included in the scope of the internal model may be 
excluded from the calculation of own funds requirements, provided that 
institutions are able to document them and demonstrate that there are no 
residual market risks stemming from these transactions. However, potential 
P&L generated by these back-to-back transactions should be considered in the 
back-testing (for those P&L components that are not excluded from the actual 
or hypothetical P&L). This is because, although they do not carry residual 
market risks, such back-to-back transactions could generate P&L (for example, 
at the inception of the trade, or where the transaction is closed before maturity). 
13. The ECB understands that instruments in the regulatory trading book which are 
lent out or repo’ed out should be included in the calculation of own funds 
requirements for market risk. Conversely, instruments borrowed/obtained via 
securities lending or reverse repo should not be included in the calculation of 
own funds requirements for market risk. This is because the securities lending 
or repo transaction does not transfer the market risk of the security. 
Furthermore, the market risk of the securities lending or repo transaction should 
be captured (if this transaction is recorded in the trading book). 


2.3 Treatment of banking book positions 


14. In accordance with Article 
92(4)(a) of the CRR, for foreign exchange (FX) risk 
and commodities risk the own funds requirements must include those arising 
from all the business activities of an institution. Therefore, the ECB understands 



that for FX risk and commodities risk, the requirements for the calculation of 
own funds and, in particular, the IMA are not limited only to regulatory trading 
book positions but also include the positions in the banking book. 
15. For institutions that have approval to use the IMA for FX risk, the ECB is aware 
that the modelling of banking book FX positions in the internal model may be 
challenging owing to different trade booking systems and different market data 
processes for the banking book and for the regulatory trading book. In 
accordance with Article 
363(2) of the CRR, permission to use internal models 
for market risk will be granted only if the internal model covers a significant 
share of the positions of a certain risk category.11 Therefore, institutions may 
exclude banking book FX positions from the scope of the internal model, 
provided that they can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the ECB that the 
scope of the approved internal model nevertheless covers a significant share of 
the positions of the FX risk category. If that is the case, the banking book FX 
exclusions should be treated in the same way as those positions excluded from 
the regulatory trading book (see Section 
2.5). 
16. In accordance with Article 
92(3)(c) of the CRR, the own funds requirements for 
foreign exchange risk must be determined in accordance with the CRR 
provisions for market risk (using either the standardised approach or the IMA). 
Therefore, where excluded from the internal model, the banking book FX 
positions must be subject to own funds requirements calculated according to 
the standardised approach. The ECB considers a prudent approach to be that 
for the purpose of this own funds requirement calculation, banking book FX 
positions are not netted with regulatory trading book FX positions. 
17. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, institutions must have 
established procedures for monitoring and ensuring compliance with a 
documented set of internal policies and controls concerning the overall 
operation of their internal models. To satisfy the requirements of 
Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, institutions should have documented processes 
and methodologies in place for determining FX positions. The ECB considers 
that in order to adequately cover the overall operation of the internal model, 
such documentation should include, in particular, the intermediate steps 
followed for calculating the FX positions, beginning with each individual 
subsidiary and proceeding to the group level (for example, before and after 
netting, the treatment of intragroup deals, the methodology applied to derive the 
FX position of banking book items including whether the institution applies the 
provisions of Article 
352(3) of the CRR). 


11 
See also Section 
2 of the Final draft RTS on assessment methodology for IMA and significant share. 


If an institution excludes any balance sheet items denominated in foreign 
currency from the FX positions in accordance with the provisions of 
Article 
352(2) of the CRR, it should document in detail which positions are 
covered by the exclusion 
– including details on the materiality of each of them 
– 
and the justification for the exclusion, so that the institution can demonstrate 
that the provisions of the article have been complied with. In particular, this also 


applies at the consolidated and sub-consolidated levels to balance sheet items 
in foreign currencies that stem from consolidated subsidiaries and is without 
prejudice to the extent and manner of prudential consolidation prescribed in 
Article 
18 of the CRR. 


18. In order for the ECB to assess whether banking book FX positions have been 
excluded from the scope of application of the IMA for the sole purpose of 
reducing the own funds requirements for market risk, the ECB can, on the basis 
of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require an institution to estimate the 
difference between the own funds requirements calculated under the 
standardised approach and the own funds requirements calculated under the 
IMA12 for those banking book FX positions.13 
19. The ECB is aware that (in contrast to FX positions) it is not common practice to 
include commodities positions in the banking book. However, where an 
institution has permission to use the internal model for commodities risk, 
commodities positions in the banking book should not be systematically 
excluded from the scope of application of the internal model. 


12 
For estimating the own funds requirements under the IMA, the calculation can be based on only one 
date, rather than the average over the last 60 
business days. 


13 
FX positions excluded from the scope of the calculation of the own funds requirements for market risk 
in accordance with Article 
352(2) of the CRR would not need to be considered for this comparison. 


14 
A typical example would be a portfolio of equity options for an institution that has no permission to 
model equity risk, so that it only models the position risk of debt instruments. 


2.4 Partial use models 


20. If an institution does not have permission to use an internal model to calculate 
the own funds requirements for market risk for all of the six risk categories listed 
in Article 
363(1) of the CRR, but only for some of them (for the purposes of this 
guide, referred to as “partial use”), the institution must apply the standardised 
approach in accordance with Article 
363(2) of the CRR to calculate the own 
funds requirements for the risk categories for which it has not been granted 
permission. 
21. In the case of portfolios for which the bulk of the risks fall outside the scope of 
the approved risk categories of an internal model,14 institutions may completely 
carve out such portfolios from the scope of application of the internal model, 
provided that the internal model still covers a significant share of the relevant 
risk categories. The ECB considers it best practice to carve out such portfolios 
only if the overall own funds requirements for market risk after the carve-out are 
higher than they would have been if the carve-out had not been performed. 
Institutions should duly notify the ECB of such exclusions in accordance with 
the Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality of extensions and 
changes of the IMA. Institutions should, nevertheless, ensure that the risks of 
these portfolios are adequately managed. Institutions should determine the own 
funds requirements for the carved-out portfolios according to the standardised 



approach (for all risk categories, including those for which the institution has 
permission to use the internal model). 
22. Portfolios for which the bulk of the risks fall within the scope of the model 
approval should be included in the calculation of own funds requirements using 
the internal model (for the risk categories within the scope of the internal model 
permission). The own funds requirements for the risks not included in the scope 
of the internal model permission should be determined according to the 
standardised approach. 
23. In accordance with Article 
362 of the CRR, general risk of debt instruments 
refers to the risk of a price change due to a change in the level of interest rates. 
The ECB considers that this is a reference to risk-free interest rates. In 
accordance with Article 
362 of the CRR, general risk of equity instruments 
refers to the risk of a price change due to a change of a broad equity-market 
movement unrelated to any specific attributes of individual securities. The ECB 
considers that this is a reference to index movements. An institution without 
permission to use the IMA for the specific risk of debt or equity instruments, and 
which applies a different definition of general risk of debt or equity instruments 
(as applicable) should be able to demonstrate that the definition/s it applies lead 
to at least the same level of own funds requirements that would result from 
applying the principles of this paragraph. 


2.5 Exclusion of positions in the regulatory trading book from the scope 
of application of the IMA 


24. In accordance with Article 
363(2) of the CRR, an internal model must cover a 
significant share of the positions of each risk category for which the permission 
is granted. The ECB understands that this requirement applies not only on the 
date on which the permission is granted, but on an ongoing basis. The ECB is 
aware that institutions have a certain margin of discretion not to include all 
positions exposed to the relevant approved risk categories, provided that the 
internal model still covers a significant share of those positions. In the ECB’s 
view, exclusions would be justified where the inclusion of those positions in the 
internal model is operationally challenging (for example, in the case of products 
requiring a more sophisticated modelling approach). Exclusions should never 
be made for the sole purpose of reducing the overall own funds requirements 
for market risk. 


The ECB considers that to be able to demonstrate that the internal model 
covers a significant share of positions, institutions should monitor the exclusion 
of market risk positions, including the materiality of those positions. In the case 
of FX and commodities risks, this monitoring should also extend to exclusions 
of banking book positions. This monitoring should consider all excluded 
positions in accordance with each relevant scope of approval of the internal 
model, which could be at individual (“solo”), sub-consolidated, or consolidated 


level. Institutions should be able to justify such exclusions and demonstrate that 
the risk of the excluded positions is adequately managed. 


25. The own funds requirements for the positions deliberately excluded by the 
institution from the internal model (including any banking book positions) should 
be determined according to the standardised approach. For these positions, 
institutions should be able to demonstrate that the level of own funds 
requirements under the standardised approach is commensurate with their risks 
and that the exclusion was not made for the sole purpose of reducing the 
overall own funds requirements for market risk.15 
26. The ECB considers that an appropriate approach to calculating the own funds 
requirements for derivatives on unusual underlyings (such as temperature, 
weather or mortality)16 could be to include them in the scope of the IMA (the 
“exotic” risks might be treated under the risks-not-in-the-model-engines 
(RNIME)17” framework, where necessary). However, institutions may use the 
standardised approach for these positions, provided that they can demonstrate 
that the level of own funds requirements under the standardised approach is 
commensurate with the risks of such positions. 
27. The ECB considers that a materiality criterion at transaction level (for example, 
a notional amount lower than a certain EUR amount) is not an appropriate 
criterion by itself for an exclusion from the scope, because the cumulative effect 
of these transactions may be a material position. Therefore, this type of 
exclusion should not be applied. 
28. If back-to-back transactions are excluded from the calculation of own funds 
requirements using the internal model (in the circumstances set out in 
paragraph 
12), it is not necessary 
– as it is with other excluded positions 
– to 
calculate the own funds requirements for these transactions under the 
standardised approach, as no residual market risks stem from them. 


15 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
13(b) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


16 
The EBA considers that certain “unusual” underlyings, such as freight rate, weather derivatives or 
emission certificates can be considered as, or assimilated to, commodities (see the EBA Single 
Rulebook Q&A, Question ID: 2014_934). 


17 
See Section 
7 for more details. 


2.6 Treatment of specific positions 


2.6.1 Own-debt exposures 


29. For the purposes of this guide, the meaning of “own debt” requires clarification, 
given that the CRR does not provide a definition. As defined in Article 
4(1)(47) 
of the CRR, “consolidated situation” means the situation that results from 
applying the requirements of the CRR to an institution as if that institution 
formed, together with one or more other entities, a single institution. As defined 



in Article 
4(1)(49) of the CRR, “sub-consolidated basis” means “… on the basis 
of the consolidated situation of a parent entity … that is not the ultimate parent 
entity”. Therefore, the ECB considers an acceptable approach to be that when 
determining their own-debt positions, institutions using an IRC model also take 
into account the debt positions in their subsidiaries within the scope of 
prudential consolidation, depending on the level within the group of the 
institution using the IRC model. 
30. By way of illustration, the positions described in the following situations can be 
considered as own-debt exposures. Figures 
1, 2 and 3 below each illustrate an 
example, as indicated. 


Figure 
1: Where the institution is the group EU parent institution 
– 
all positions in debt exposures to institutions within the prudential consolidation 
scope should be considered as own-debt exposures. 


Figure 
2: Where the institution is the sub-consolidating institution or financial 
holding company that is not the ultimate EU parent institution 
– 
all positions in debt exposures to institutions within the relevant prudential sub-
consolidation scope should be considered as own-debt exposures. 


Figure 
3: Where the institution is a subsidiary without dependent subsidiaries 
(solo) 
– all debt exposures of an institution to itself at the solo level should be 
considered as own-debt exposures. 


This is without prejudice to other definitions of own debt that institutions may 
apply and that the ECB will assess on a case-by-case basis to take into account 
specific circumstances. 


Figure 1 
Own-debt positions at the consolidated level 


 

EU parent institutionsPSub-consolidating institution or 
financial holding company 
SC1SubsidiaryS1Sub-consolidating institution or 
financial holding company 
SC2SubsidiaryS2SubsidiaryS3SubsidiaryS4
Own-debt positions at the consolidated level are shown with a blue background. 



Figure 2 
Own-debt positions at the sub-consolidated level of the sub-consolidating institution 
or financial holding company SC1 


 

EU parent institutionsPSub-consolidating institution or 
financial holding company 
SC1SubsidiaryS1Sub-consolidating institution or 
financial holding company 
SC2SubsidiaryS2SubsidiaryS3SubsidiaryS4
Own-debt positions at the sub-consolidated level of the sub-consolidating institution or financial holding company SC1 are shown with 
a blue background, while non-own-debt positions at the sub-consolidated level of SC1 are shown with a red background. 


Figure 3 
Own-debt positions at the solo level of subsidiary S1 


 

EU parent institutionsPSub-consolidating institution or 
financial holding company 
SC1SubsidiaryS1Sub-consolidating institution or 
financial holding company 
SC2SubsidiaryS2SubsidiaryS3SubsidiaryS4
Own-debt positions at the solo level of subsidiary S1 are shown with a blue background, while non-own-debt positions at the solo level 
of S1 are shown with a red background. 


31. Under paragraphs 
7.1 and 7.2 of the EBA Guidelines on the IRC, for long or 
short positions in an institution’s own debt which may arise from trading or 
market-making activity in its own-debt issuances, or from trading protection in 
the institution’s own name (for example, via an index), the institution should only 
model the migration risk. The default risk of these positions should not be 
modelled in the IRC approach. 


To ensure consistency with the IRC model when modelling the specific risk of 
debt instruments in the VaR and sVaR models, institutions should include their 
own creditworthiness.18 The ECB considers it best practice to model such own 

18 
This refers exclusively to position risk taken against debt issued by the institution or derivatives 
referencing that debt and does not refer to debit valuation adjustments (DVA). 



creditworthiness as (a) separate risk factor(s) in the VaR and sVaR models.19 In 
addition, in accordance with Article 367(1)(a) of the CRR, the model must 
accurately capture all material price risks. Therefore, the ECB understands that 
the funding risk embedded in own liabilities held in the trading book should be 
modelled in the IMA. 


19 
This understanding is also supported by Recital (20) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


32. As regards the general risk of debt instruments for own debt, and in the 
absence of any specific provision in the CRR or the EBA Guidelines on the IRC, 
the ECB understands that the general risk of own-debt instruments should be 
accommodated in the internal model if the institution has the relevant approval. 


2.6.2 Positions in defaulted debt 


33. Under paragraph 
4.5 of the EBA Guidelines on the IRC, institutions should 
include in the calculation of the IRC the positions in defaulted debt that are held 
in the regulatory trading book, where material. In order for the ECB to assess 
the appropriateness of the treatment of such positions, the ECB can, on the 
basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions to provide a list of 
all positions in defaulted debt that are held in the regulatory trading book, along 
with the following information: 
(a) the market value of the exposure; 
(b) notional value of the exposure; 
(c) a Boolean variable indicating whether the positions are included in the 
VaR/sVaR; 
(d) a Boolean variable indicating whether the positions are included in the 
IRC. 



34. The ECB considers that to reflect paragraph 
4.5 of the EBA Guidelines on the 
IRC, material positions in defaulted debt should be included in the scope of the 
IMA. It also considers it best practice that non-material positions are included in 
the IMA; either in the VaR, sVaR (and IRC) engines or under the RNIME 
framework for the VaR, sVaR (and IRC). 
35. Under paragraph 
4.5 of the EBA Guidelines on the IRC, positions in defaulted 
debt held in the regulatory trading book should, where material, be included in 
the calculation of the IRC. In accordance with the requirement in Article 
372(d) 
of the CRR as it relates to Article 
370(e), the IRC model must be sensitive to 
material idiosyncratic differences between similar but not identical positions. 
Therefore, the ECB considers that when modelling the risk of price changes of 
positions in defaulted debt in the IRC, and to account for those idiosyncratic 
differences, institutions should apply a specific calibration of the recovery rates 
which is appropriate for the positions in defaulted debt. If an institution does not 



have the capacity to model price changes of positions in defaulted debt in the 
IRC model (for example, owing to IT constraints), the ECB considers that an 
appropriate way to account for those differences is to apply a stressed price of 
the positions in defaulted debt that is proven to be adequately conservative 
given the quantile and holding period of the IRC. 
36. The ECB considers that default should be an absorbing state (i.e. 
once a 
position has defaulted it does not migrate to a different state). Therefore, the 
ECB considers it best practice that no migration from default to non-default 
states is considered in the IRC model. 


2.6.3 Collective investment undertakings 


37. This paragraph, and the following paragraphs 
38 to 43 inclusive, apply to all 
exposures that institutions may have in collective investment undertakings 
(CIUs), as referred to in Article 
4(1)(7) of the CRR (including exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs), equity investments in hedge funds, etc.) 
– which for the purposes 
of these paragraphs are referred to as “positions in CIUs” 
– and also apply to 
derivative instruments that have these instruments as underlying assets. 
38. In accordance with Articles 
368(1)(e) and 103(1) of the CRR, institutions must 
have established procedures for ensuring compliance with a documented set of 
internal policies and controls concerning the overall operation of their internal 
models and the regulatory trading book. Therefore, the ECB considers that in 
order to ensure that an appropriate treatment is applied to positions in CIUs in 
their internal models for market risk, institutions should have a documented set 
of policies and controls in place to identify, for each CIU, the following: 
(a) the risk categories, as listed in Article 
363 of the CRR, to which the CIU is 
subject; 
(b) whether the criteria as defined in Article 
349 of the CRR are fulfilled; 
(c) whether daily look-through is possible, as referred to in Article 
350(1) of 
the CRR; 
(d) where daily look-through is not possible, whether the requirements as laid 
down in Article 
350(2) of the CRR are satisfied 
– in particular, institutions 
should define and document the methodology used to assess the 
correlation between the CIU and the index/basket that it tracks; 
(e) the extent to which the CIU can be marked-to-market daily by reference to 
an active, liquid two-way market as referred to in Article 
103(1) of the CRR 
(for example, whether a daily liquid price is available). 



39. The above information in relation to each CIU should be documented. In the 
ECB’s view it is necessary to update the information regularly, in order to 
ensure that the documented information is based on the current characteristics 
of the positions in CIUs and fully reflects the market risk to which the positions 



are exposed. The ECB considers that an appropriate update frequency for 
existing positions in CIUs is at least annual, as one year is a reasonable time in 
which significant changes in the market or in the positions in CIUs could occur. 
In addition, this time frame would allow institutions to use the outcomes of the 
updates in the review of their overall risk management process, as referred to in 
Article 
368(2) of the CRR. For new positions in CIUs, the ECB considers that 
the procedure should take place before the investment in a new CIU is 
approved internally, in order to ensure that institutions compute own funds 
requirements for the positions in CIUs in compliance with the CRR 
requirements. 
40. For the foreign exchange market risk related to CIUs, the CRR contemplates a 
specific treatment. In accordance with Article 
367(2)(b) of the CRR, the actual 
foreign exchange positions of a CIU must be taken into account in the internal 
model. Institutions may rely on third-party reporting of the foreign exchange 
positions of a CIU where the correctness of that reporting is adequately 
ensured. If an institution is not aware of the foreign exchange positions of a 
CIU, this position must be carved out and treated in accordance with 
Article 
353(3) of the CRR. 
41. As regards general and specific risk of equity instruments, general and specific 
risk of debt instruments, and commodities risk: for those positions in CIUs for 
which the conditions for either the look-through approach (as referred to in 
Article 
350(1) of the CRR) or the representation approach (as referred to in 
Article 
350(2) of the CRR) are met, the ECB considers that in order to ensure 
an accurate risk measurement, the own funds requirements for the general and 
specific risk of equity instruments, the general and specific risk of debt 
instruments and the commodities risk should be calculated by incorporating the 
underlying investments of the relevant CIU 
– or the index/basket that it tracks 
– 
into the internal model for the risk categories for which the institution has 
permission to use internal models. 


Where an institution with internal model approval for specific risk of debt 
instruments includes listed equity positions in the IRC, it should be consistent in 
including in the IRC either the underlying listed equity positions of the CIU, or 
those of the index/basket that the CIU tracks. 


42. For positions in CIUs where neither the conditions for the look-through 
approach as referred to in Article 
350(1) of the CRR nor the conditions for the 
representation approach as referred to in Article 
350(2) of the CRR are met, the 
following apply. 
(a) In accordance with Article 
364(2)(a) of the CRR, institutions using an 
internal model to calculate their own funds requirements for specific risk of 
debt instruments must fulfil an additional own funds requirement for 
specific risk of debt instruments in accordance with the standardised 
approach for positions in CIUs under Articles 
348 to 350 of the CRR. 






(b) The ECB considers that the positions in CIUs can be incorporated into the 
VaR and sVaR models as a single risk factor to account for the general 
and specific risk of equity, the general risk of debt instruments, and the 
commodities risk of the positions in CIUs. As is the case for any other 
position, sufficient objective information on market risk should be available. 
The ECB considers that a suitable approach is to use the daily liquid price 
of the CIU. 





43. For those risk categories in respect of which the institution does not use an 
internal model to compute own funds requirements for market risk, or for 
positions in CIUs to which none of the above-mentioned provisions apply, the 
institution should compute the own funds requirements for the respective 
positions in CIUs according to the standardised approach for CIUs. 


2.7 Aggregation requirements 


44. In accordance with Article 
363 of the CRR, competent authorities may grant 
permission to institutions to calculate their own funds requirements for market 
risk by using their internal models instead of, or in combination with, the 
standardised approach 
– provided that the internal model covers a significant 
share of the positions of a certain risk category. For example, in accordance 
with Articles 
6(1) and 11(1) of the CRR, institutions must meet their own funds 
requirements on an individual basis (unless, for example, a derogation in the 
circumstances set out in Article 
7 of the CRR has been granted), and the parent 
institution in a Member State must comply with the own funds requirements on 
a consolidated basis. 
(a) which legal entities within the group have been granted permission to use 
an internal model for calculating own funds requirements for market risk; 
(b) the scope of application of each model permission (i.e. 
individual, sub-
consolidated or consolidated); 
(c) the risk categories listed in Article 
363(1) of the CRR for which each 
permission has been granted. 





Therefore, the institution at the highest level of consolidation operating within 
the framework of the Single Supervisory Mechanism should be able to specify: 


The ECB also understands that, for institutions to calculate own funds 
requirements at the consolidated level by using their internal models, a 
permission to use their internal models at consolidated level is required under 
Article 
363(2) of the CRR. 


45. In those cases in which the scope of the permission applies at the consolidated 
or sub-consolidated level, institutions should be able to provide a list of legal 
entities included in the scope of consolidation or sub-consolidation, specifying 
which of those entities effectively contribute to the market risk own funds 



requirements determined by using the internal model. In order for the ECB to 
assess how the own funds requirements are determined, institutions should 
also be able to provide information on how each legal entity is integrated into 
the information system infrastructure of the risk management system and 
whether impediments exist to such integration. 


If impediments exist to the integration of the risk numbers from individual legal 
entities, the ECB considers it best practice to integrate the risk numbers from 
these entities into the model-based own funds requirements by applying a 
simple sum aggregation. 


46. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(a) of the CRR, the internal model must be 
closely integrated into the daily risk management process of the institution and 
serve as the basis for reporting risk exposures to senior management. 
Therefore, the ECB understands that institutions should ensure an integrated 
and harmonised risk management across all legal entities included in the scope 
of the model permission. 
47. In accordance with Article 
325b of the CRR, institutions may use positions in 
one institution or undertaking to offset positions in another institution or 
undertaking only for the purpose of calculating net positions and own funds 
requirements for market risk on a consolidated basis, and only subject to the 
permission of the competent authorities. The ECB understands that this 
requirement applies to all positions, in particular to intragroup transactions.20 
The offsetting of positions can be performed irrespective of the calculation 
approach that is applied for market risk own funds requirements (i.e. 
IMA or 
standardised approach). In order for the ECB to assess how these 
requirements are fulfilled, institutions should document how the offsetting of 
positions is performed. 
48. In accordance with Article 
367(3) of the CRR, an institution may use empirical 
correlations within risk categories and across risk categories only if the 
institution's approach to measuring correlations is sound and implemented with 
integrity. The ECB understands that for empirical correlations to be sound they 
should be based on reliable and objective data. If this cannot be ensured, an 
institution should use the simple sum aggregation of stand-alone risk numbers 
within risk categories or across risk categories. 


20 
This interpretation is also supported by the explanation in footnote 
7 of the Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share. 


21 
If this is not possible, the calculation should be based on the approved risk categories in accordance 
with Article 
363(1) of the CRR. 


In order for the ECB to assess the soundness and integrity of the 
implementation of the use of empirical correlations, the ECB can, on the basis 
of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions to provide the stand-
alone VaR and sVaR corresponding to each of the following risk classes:21 
interest rate risk; equity risk; commodity risk; foreign exchange risk; and credit 
spread risk. 



3 Regulatory back-testing of VaR models 


3.1 Regulatory references 


Table 26 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

34 

 

105 

(10) 

352 

(2) 

366 

 

368 

(1) 

386 

(3) 

SSM Regulation 

15/10/2013 

10 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

Final draft RTS on assessment methodology 
for IMA and significant share 

22/11/2016 

40 

(4), (5), (10) 

 

43 

(4) 



 


Once adopted by the European Commission, the Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share will become an 
additional relevant regulatory reference. Currently that document only exists in 
a final draft version. 


3.2 Scope of application of regulatory back-testing 


49. The scope of application of regulatory back-testing, as referred to in Article 
366 
of the CRR, should be clearly documented. 
50. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the CRR, regulatory back-testing compares 
the hypothetical and actual changes in the portfolio’s value (“hypothetical P&L” 
and “actual P&L”) with the related one-day VaR number generated by the 
institution's model. Therefore, the changes in value of all of (and only) the 
instruments and transactions entailing positions included in the scope of 
calculation of the VaR model should be considered in the calculation of the 
hypothetical P&L and the actual P&L. 
51. In particular, if the institution is authorised to apply the IMA for foreign exchange 
and/or commodities risk positions, and the banking book positions in these risk 
categories are included in the scope of the internal model, the institution should 
include these banking book positions in the back-testing and should clearly 
document how the actual and the hypothetical P&L of these positions are 
calculated. 
52. Regarding positions in the banking book that are included in the IMA, only the 
changes in value of market data pertaining to FX risk and commodity risk 



should be taken into account in the calculation of the actual and the 
hypothetical P&L. Only for those instruments or transactions where the 
separation of the positions stemming from risk categories other than FX risk or 
commodities risk (for example, risk of debt instruments) is operationally 
challenging or its effect on the total P&L is immaterial, an institution may include 
changes in value of market parameters pertaining to all risk categories in the 
actual and the hypothetical P&L. Institutions should be able to justify the 
immateriality or the operational challenge, if applicable. In particular, 
considering only the effect of FX risk in the actual and the hypothetical P&L is 
not deemed to be operationally challenging. 
53. Positions excluded from the calculation of the own funds requirements for 
market risk on the basis of a permission granted by the competent authorities 
under Article 
352(2) of the CRR (i.e. 
(i) 
positions taken in order to hedge against 
the adverse effect of the exchange rate on the institution’s capital ratios, or 
(ii) 
positions which an institution has which relate to items that are already 
deducted in the calculation of own funds) should also be excluded from the 
scope of application of the back-testing. 
54. In accordance with Article 
386(3) of the CRR, eligible hedges that are included 
in the calculation of own funds requirements for CVA risk must not be included 
in the calculation of the own funds requirements for specific risk. Therefore, the 
change in value of those positions that are attributable to specific risk of those 
eligible hedges should also be excluded from the actual and the hypothetical 
P&L. However, if the own funds requirements for general risk of these eligible 
hedges are calculated using the VaR model (see paragraph 
10), the change in 
value of those positions that are attributable to general risk should be included 
in the actual and in the hypothetical P&L. 
55. Hedges which under Article 
386(3) of the CRR are not eligible hedges for 
regulatory CVA should be included in the VaR calculation and in the scope of 
calculation of the hypothetical P&L and the actual P&L for back-testing. 


3.3 Historical period used to perform back-testing, definition of 
business days, and documentation 


56. In accordance with Article 
366(2) of the CRR, the addend to the multiplication 
factors must depend on the number of overshootings for the most recent 250 
business days. 
57. For the purpose of paragraph 
56, institutions should define and document local 
and global business days according to the guidance set out in paragraphs 
58 to 
60. 
58. The ECB considers that when the business trading unit of an institution is 
conducting planned business operations on the risk positions (even with a 
reduced number of staff) on a given day in a given location, this constitutes a 
local business day for the institution in that location. Therefore, as it is a 



business day, it requires actual and hypothetical P&L calculation, VaR 
calculation and market risk monitoring and reporting. Institutions should 
consistently define their business days, and therefore should be able to justify 
any non-business days. Unchanged risk positions are a necessary but not 
sufficient condition to demonstrate adequately that a particular day constitutes a 
non-business day. 
59. The ECB considers that global business days should be defined at the 
consolidated level (or for a national sub-group, at the sub-consolidated level), 
and that for the purpose of defining global business days the institution’s most 
important trading location (the “reference location”) should be used, to ensure 
that the most important trading activity is adequately captured in back-testing. 
Global business days should include at least the local business days of the 
reference location. If there are two or more important trading locations (of 
approximately the same size), the institution should choose one reference 
location and is allowed to add additional global business days based on the 
local business days of the other important trading locations. In such a case, the 
rationale underlying this choice should be documented. 
60. For every global business day, actual and hypothetical P&L calculation, VaR 
calculation and market risk monitoring and reporting are required.22 However, if 
such calculations are carried out on non-global business days, these should not 
be used for the purpose of regulatory back-testing. The actual and hypothetical 
P&L used for back-testing should always be the P&L between two consecutive 
global business days, and should be compared with the related one-day VaR 
forecast for a one-day holding period between those two global business days, 
and be based on the composition of the portfolio on the first of those global 
business days. 
61. Based on Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, the ECB understands that institutions 
should have a documented policy and procedure describing how they calculate 
the actual and hypothetical P&L. The ECB considers that to be fit for purpose, 
the policy and procedure should include, at least, the following key information: 
(a) how the actual P&L is calculated and, in particular, the differences 
between the economic23 and actual P&L; 
(b) the fees, commissions and net interest income excluded from the actual 
P&L; 
(c) how the hypothetical P&L is calculated and, in particular, the differences 
between the actual and hypothetical P&L; 
(d) the valuation adjustments not updated every day and whether or not they 
are included in the P&L time series. 





22 
All positions of trading units in a location with local non-business days should be included in the 
calculation of the consolidated figures. 


23 
As defined in the glossary. 



In order for the ECB to assess the appropriateness and implementation of the 
policy and procedure for the calculation of the actual and hypothetical P&L, the 
ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions 
to provide, for a sample of transactions or portfolios, detailed decompositions of 
economic, actual and hypothetical P&L into their elements. 


3.4 Calculation of actual P&L 


3.4.1 General rules 


62. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the CRR, actual P&L must be based on 
actual changes in the portfolio's end-of-day value. Therefore, the ECB 
understands that the actual P&L should correspond closely to the daily 
economic P&L as reflected in the books and records of the institution, with the 
exception of certain elements as specified in the following paragraphs. 
63. Actual P&L should include the profit and loss stemming from intraday activities, 
as they change the portfolio’s value. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the 
CRR, fees, commissions and net interest income must be excluded from the 
actual P&L. The definitions and methods used to apply this exclusion should be 
clearly documented. 
64. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the CRR, fees, commissions, and net 
interest income must be excluded from the portfolio's actual value when 
computing the actual P&L. The ECB understands that these exclusions from the 
portfolio’s actual end-of-day value are required by the CRR so that fees, 
commissions, and interest gains or losses are removed from the daily actual 
P&L in order to ensure that the back-testing assesses whether P&L fluctuations 
driven by market risk are accurately captured by the VaR model. Furthermore, 
the ECB acknowledges that the net interest income definition applied to banking 
book items accounted for at amortised cost cannot easily be transferred to the 
fair value items in the regulatory trading book. 


The ECB considers that it is acceptable for an institution to define the net 
interest income in the regulatory trading book as equal to zero; this leads to no 
P&L component being excluded as net interest income. 


The ECB considers that where an institution uses another definition for net 
interest income it should be able to duly justify this approach, taking into 
account its trading strategy. In any case, theta effects (for example, options 
theta) and P&L contributions of unearned credit spreads should not contribute 
to the net interest income, because they are susceptible to market risk. 



65. The actual P&L is calculated for instruments and transactions entailing 
positions24 in the regulatory trading book and banking book which are within the 
scope of the IMA. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the CRR, the actual P&L 
must be based on the actual value at the end of the subsequent day. Therefore, 
the ECB considers that the change in value of all market risk parameters (even 
those that are not modelled in the VaR) should be taken into account in the 
actual P&L. 
66. In order to ensure that the actual P&L corresponds closely to the daily 
economic P&L as reflected in the books and records of the institution, the ECB 
considers that the pricing methods, model parametrisations and market data 
should be the same as those used to compute the daily economic P&L. 


24 
For the purposes of this guide, a “position” is defined as a risk position (as stated in the glossary). For 
example, for a bond denominated in FX and where the scope of the IMA approval does not include FX 
risk, the FX risk position is not in the scope of the VaR model, while the FX risk is reflected in the actual 
P&L. 


25 
This refers at least, but is not limited to, the examples of potential valuation adjustments listed in 
Article 
105(10) of the CRR. 


26 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
40(5)(d) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


27 
As set out in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/101 of 26 
October 2015 supplementing 
Regulation (EU) No 
575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory 
technical standards for prudent valuation under Article 
105(14) (OJ L 
21, 28.1.2016). Those categories 
may overlap with fair value adjustments (e.g. 
market price uncertainty, close-out costs, etc.). 


3.4.2 Valuation adjustments 


67. Because the actual P&L should correspond closely to the daily economic P&L 
as reflected in the books and records of the institution, all valuation adjustments 
or reserves made in the economic P&L are also relevant for the calculation of 
the actual P&L. Therefore, institutions should clearly document all such 
valuation adjustments and reserves (methodology, frequencies, calculation 
process, etc.). 
68. Except for the elements referred to in paragraphs 
69 to 71 below, fair value 
adjustments25 and all other valuation adjustments or reserves (hereinafter 
referred to as “adjustments”) made in the economic P&L should be included in 
the actual P&L even if they are not computed on a daily basis 
– provided that 
they are in the scope of market risk. 
69. The ECB considers that credit valuation adjustments (CVA) should be excluded 
from the actual P&L,26 because they receive a specific regulatory treatment. 
The same applies to debit valuation adjustments (DVA), due to their nature as 
the reverse side of CVA. 
70. Additional valuation adjustments (AVA)27 that are calculated to obtain the 
prudent value of the positions in the regulatory trading book should also be 
excluded from the actual P&L, as they receive a specific regulatory treatment 
under Article 
34 of the CRR as an additional layer of prudence. 



71. Changes in portfolio value generated by the default of a counterparty should be 
excluded from the actual P&L, provided that the institution demonstrates that 
they are related solely to counterparty credit risk; this is because the 
corresponding profits or losses are taken into account in the institution’s 
counterparty credit risk framework. Conversely, profits or losses due to the 
default of a bond or other fixed income security are not in the scope of 
counterparty credit risk and should therefore be included in the actual P&L. 
72. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the CRR, back-testing must be performed 
daily on the portfolio's end-of-day value. It could therefore be understood that 
changes in valuation adjustment figures should be computed daily to obtain an 
accurate portfolio end-of-day value. However, the ECB is aware that some 
valuation adjustments are not calculated daily by some institutions. In such 
cases, the ECB considers that changes in valuation adjustment figures should 
be taken into account in the actual P&L on the business day which is taken as 
the reference date for the calculation of the valuation adjustment. As a 
consequence, institutions should not apply any kind of smoothing or distribution 
over several dates in relation to changes in valuation adjustment figures. 


3.5 Calculation of hypothetical P&L 


73. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the CRR, the hypothetical P&L is based on 
changes in the portfolio's value assuming unchanged positions at the end of the 
subsequent day. The ECB understands that the term “unchanged positions” 
refers to an unchanged composition of the portfolio in terms of instruments and 
transactions. Therefore, the P&L generated by intraday trading and by new 
transactions entered (or maturing transactions) during the day is not taken into 
account. The ECB understands that the term “subsequent day” could imply a 
passage of time of one business day and that this could lead to a change in the 
risk positions due solely to this passage of time. Therefore, institutions may 
choose to include the passage of time of one business day in the hypothetical 
P&L. 


The ECB understands from Article 
366(3) of the CRR that back-testing on the 
hypothetical P&L is intended to focus on detecting deficiencies in the internal 
model. Therefore, back-testing on hypothetical P&L should be used as a 
statistical test of the integrity of the VaR measure, allowing for a more “pure” 
testing of the model.28 


28 
This understanding is also supported by Section 
2.3.2 of the report of the Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share. 


74. In accordance with Article 
366(3) of the CRR, the hypothetical P&L is to be 
based on the portfolio's value, assuming unchanged positions, while the actual 
P&L is to be based on the portfolio’s actual value. Therefore, the ECB considers 
that any adjustments taken into account in order to obtain the actual value of 
the portfolio should not be considered in the hypothetical P&L, unless they are 



part of the VaR model.29 Consequently, any other profit and loss element 
– 
such as credit valuation adjustments (CVA), debit valuation adjustments (DVA), 
additional valuation adjustments (AVA) and any other valuation adjustments 
– 
as well as fees, commissions and net interest income, should not be included in 
the hypothetical P&L.30 
75. As both the actual and the hypothetical P&L are based on the portfolio’s value, 
they should be calculated using the same pricing framework. Therefore, the 
hypothetical P&L should be computed using the same pricing methods, model 
parametrisations and market data as those used to compute the daily economic 
P&L. Where an institution computes the hypothetical P&L in a system that is 
different from the one that is used to produce the daily economic P&L, the risk 
is that differences in the computations could occur. To minimise this risk, the 
institution should ensure that differences in market value computations at 
instrument or transaction level and at the total hypothetical P&L level are 
negligible, and should monitor the alignment frequently. 
76. The back-testing on the hypothetical P&L should be used as a statistical test of 
the integrity of the VaR measure. Therefore, paragraph 
75 applies to partial use 
models so that only the changes in market value due to changes in pricing risk 
factors within the risk categories in the scope of the model are considered, and 
the other pricing risk factors outside the scope of the model are held fixed.31 
For example, (i) 
if the institution is authorised to use an internal model for 
general interest rate risk only, the hypothetical P&L should include the changes 
in value of market parameters pertaining to general interest rate risk only; or 
(ii) 
if FX risk is not in the scope of the model, market value changes due to 
changes in the FX rate should not be reflected in the hypothetical P&L.32 


29 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
40(5)(d) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


30 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
40(4)(d) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


31 
The requirement to use the market quote or pricing methods and model parametrisations used for the 
economic P&L takes precedence over the requirement to change only the risk factors within the risk 
categories in scope of the model in this case. 


32 
For example, let pv(𝑡;𝑝;𝑔𝑡,𝑠𝑡,𝑒𝑡,𝑓𝑡,𝑥𝑡) be the present market value of a position at time 𝑡 used in the 
economic P&L calculation, depending on some parameter set 𝑝 (not explicitly time dependent), and 
risk factor sets 𝑔𝑡,𝑠𝑡,𝑒𝑡,𝑓𝑡,𝑥𝑡 for all risk categories at time 𝑡. If the specific interest rate risk 𝑠 and the 
FX risk 𝑥 are not in the scope of the model, the risk factor values in those categories do not change 
from the previous time 𝑡0, and the hypothetical P&L at time 𝑡 should be calculated as: 
HypoP&L(𝑡) = pv(𝑡𝑥; 𝑝; 𝑔𝑡,𝑠𝑡0,𝑒𝑡,𝑓𝑡,𝑥𝑡0) − pv(𝑡0; 𝑝; 𝑔𝑡0,𝑠𝑡0,𝑒𝑡0,𝑓𝑡0,𝑥𝑡0), where 
𝑡𝑥 = 𝑡0 if VaR uses an instantaneous shock; or 𝑡𝑥 = 𝑡 if VaR includes theta for consistency. 


33 
In cases where the exclusion of the P&L stemming from risk categories not included in the scope of the 
internal model is operationally challenging or its effect on the total P&L is immaterial, if a market price 
that incorporates all risks is used in the economic P&L it should also be used in the hypothetical P&L. 


In the case of partial use models, only for those instruments or transactions 
where the exclusion of the P&L stemming from risk categories not included in 
the scope of the internal model is operationally challenging or its effect on the 
total P&L is immaterial, an institution may include in the hypothetical P&L those 
changes in value of market parameters pertaining to all risk categories.33 
Institutions should be able to justify the immateriality or the operational 


challenge, if applicable. In particular, excluding the effect of FX risk in the 
hypothetical P&L is not automatically deemed to be operationally challenging. 


77. The passage of time effect (theta effect) should be considered (or not) in the 
VaR and in the hypothetical P&L in a consistent manner. However, if institutions 
include the passage of time in the P&L and not in the VaR, or vice versa, they 
should be able to demonstrate that the effect of this inconsistency is not 
material.34 


34 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
43(4) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


3.6 Counting of overshootings 


78. In accordance with Article 
366(2) and (3) of the CRR, the back-testing addend 
is determined as the higher of the number of overshootings under hypothetical 
and actual changes in the value of the portfolio for the most recent 250 
business days. 
79. In accordance with Article 
366(5) of the CRR, institutions must notify the 
competent authorities promptly, and in any case no later than within five 
working days, of overshootings that result from their back-testing programme. 
The ECB understands that the period of five working days should start on the 
first working day after the “subsequent day” as referred to in the second and 
third paragraphs of Article 
366(3) of the CRR. 
80. If either a P&L or the VaR is not available or cannot be computed within five 
working days, the ECB considers that there is a risk that an overshooting may 
have occurred, and that in order to ensure that the number of overshootings is 
not misrepresented, a prudent approach would be to consider such an instance 
as an overshooting under hypothetical or actual changes, respectively. 
81. If an overshooting has occurred due to malfunctions in the calculation of a P&L 
or the VaR and is notified to the ECB, and the institution demonstrates to the 
satisfaction of the ECB that the overshooting was caused by an acceptable 
reason, the institution may withdraw the overshooting notification. The 
explanation of the malfunction should be supported by clear and complete 
documentation. If malfunctions leading to erroneous calculations and 
overshooting notifications are recurrent, this may indicate that the internal 
model is not implemented with integrity as required in Article 
368(1) of the CRR, 
and the ECB may require the institution to present a remediation plan. 
82. The ECB considers that examples of acceptable reasons for withdrawing an 
overshooting notification could include: 
(a) errors in the calculation of the actual P&L, hypothetical P&L or VaR due to 
IT issues or incorrect data; 






(b) errors in the scope of positions for the calculations of the P&L or the VaR; 
(c) false or missing bookings, or incorrect positions included in the scope of 
the calculations; 
(d) delayed reserve releases; 
(e) temporary transmission problems between different business locations. 
(a) differences in pricing functions between the VaR engine and the actual and 
hypothetical P&L calculations (typically using front-office pricing functions); 
(b) losses due to the trading or transfer of large positions at a price that 
deviates from the market price as a result of trading volumes; 
(c) the overshooting corresponds to a small difference between VaR and a 
P&L; 
(d) unexpected market movements; 
(e) a model deficiency that has caused an overshooting in the past has 
already been addressed (there is no backward adjustment of 
overshootings); 
(f) a change in the P&L calculation method, pricing function or 
parameterisation of a pricing function or a change in the market data input 
used in the P&L calculation. 





83. However, the ECB considers the following to be a non-exhaustive list of 
reasons for withdrawing an overshooting notification which would not be 
acceptable, because they are not considered as malfunctions in the calculation 
of the P&L or the VaR: 
84. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(a) of the CRR, the internal model must be 
closely integrated into the daily risk management process. In order for 
institutions to be able to meet this requirement, the ECB considers that the VaR 
numbers should be available within three business days. In addition, this would 
enable institutions to fulfil the requirement to notify back-testing overshootings 
within five business days. 


If delays in the VaR computation are recurrent, this may indicate that the 
internal model is not implemented with integrity as required by Article 
368(1) of 
the CRR, and the ECB may require the institution to justify such delays or to 
present a remediation plan. 


3.7 Analysis of overshootings 


85. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(b) of the CRR, the risk control unit must 
produce and analyse daily reports on the output of any internal model, including 
overshootings. The ECB considers that such an analysis of overshootings 



should include at least the following areas, as they are the most relevant drivers 
of the VaR number: 
(a) identification of the set of positions responsible for the overshooting 
(portfolio analysis); 
(b) identification, description and analysis of the market moves contributing to 
the overshooting (market analysis); 
(c) identification of possible weaknesses in the internal model in the light of 
(a) and (b) above (analysis of the internal model). 





Paragraphs 
86 to 89 explain what the ECB considers are best practices in order 
to analyse each of the three areas referred to in (a), (b) and (c) above. 


The ECB considers it best practice that for every regulatory back-testing 
overshooting a detailed analysis should be performed by the institution and 
provided to the competent authority within one month.35 


35 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
40(10) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


In accordance with Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR, any internal model for market 
risk must have a proven track record of reasonable accuracy in measuring 
risks. In order to assess the track record of reasonably accuracy in measuring 
risk, the ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, request a 
detailed analysis (in accordance with its specific instructions) of overshootings 
and reporting of time series related to back-testing. 


3.7.1 Portfolio analysis 


86. The analysis of the back-testing overshooting should include a detailed 
description of the trading portfolio for which the one-day VaR forecast 
calculated was exceeded by the one-day change in the portfolio’s value. If the 
overshooting was notified for the actual P&L, the intraday changes in the 
portfolio that affected the actual change should also be analysed. 
87. The analysis of back-testing overshooting should be performed not only at the 
overall portfolio level, but also at lower portfolio levels, to identify the main 
positions that caused the overshooting. If specific sub-portfolios can be 
identified, they should be mentioned and analysed. 


3.7.2 Market analysis 


88. The analysis of the market should describe the market moves contributing to 
the cause of the overshooting and explain them on the basis of objective market 
data (for example, asset prices, indices, interest rates, FX rates, implied 
correlations and volatilities). To assess the significance of the market data 



movements, the market data, including those that are risk factors in the VaR, 
should be analysed in a historical context. The significance of the change in 
market data that are risk factors in the VaR, and which contributed to the P&L, 
should be tested against the historical 99% confidence interval of risk factor 
changes. Changes in the structure of correlations between the risk factors 
should also be analysed. In addition, the analysis should, as far as possible, 
include the economic reasons for the market movements. 


3.7.3 Analysis of the internal model 


89. The suitability of the internal model should be assessed on the basis of the two 
previous analyses. Where positions contributing to the back-testing 
overshooting can be identified, the appropriateness of the model for these 
particular positions should be assessed. To do this, the part of the P&L that can 
be explained by the model (i.e. 
risk factors and pricing functions) should be 
distinguished from the part which cannot. In addition, the reliability of the VaR 
calculation and of the actual and hypothetical changes in the portfolio should be 
evaluated. The analysis of the internal model should focus on: 
(a) the appropriateness of risk factors used; 
(b) the modelling of risk factors; 
(c) the suitability of the processes for calculating VaR, hypothetical P&L and 
actual P&L. 





4 Aspects of internal validation of market risk models 


4.1 Regulatory references 


Table 27 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

368 

(1), (2) 

369 

 

SSM Regulation 

15/10/2013 

10 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

Final draft RTS on assessment methodology 
for IMA and significant share 

22/11/2016 

23 

(2) 



 


Once adopted by the European Commission, the Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share will become an 
additional relevant regulatory reference. Currently that document only exists in 
a final draft version. 



4.2 Frequency of internal validation 


90. Institutions are required under Article 
369(1) of the CRR to conduct a validation 
of their internal models on a periodic basis. The ECB considers that an 
appropriate frequency is at least annually, as one year is a reasonable time in 
which significant changes in the market or in the composition of the portfolio 
could occur.36 In addition, a validation conducted at least annually would allow 
the institution to use the results in the review of its overall risk management 
process, as referred to in Article 
368(2) of the CRR. 


36 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
23(3) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


37 
See the glossary. 


4.3 Internal back-testing of VaR models 


4.3.1 Granularity of internal back-testing 


91. In accordance with Article 
369(1)(b) of the CRR, institutions must, in addition to 
the regulatory back-testing programmes, carry out their own internal model 
validation tests 
– including back-testing 
– in relation to the risks and the 
structure of their portfolios. The ECB considers that to satisfy the requirement 
regarding internal back-testing in relation to the risks and the structure of the 
portfolios, institutions should perform separate back-testing at more granular 
levels than the top-of-the-house level37 on at least the hypothetical P&L 
(i.e. 
counting and analysing of overshootings under the hypothetical P&L). 
(a) The ECB understands that, at a minimum, internal back-testing should be 
performed: 
(i) at one level below the top-of-the-house level; 
(ii) for each portfolio that is subject to a separate VaR limit established by 
the institution’s management body. 



(b) Where an institution intends to apply the revisions to the IMA as set out in 
the fundamental review of the trading book (FRTB) in the future, the ECB 
considers that it would be beneficial if the institution identified the sub-
portfolios within the current scope of the internal model that would most 
likely satisfy the requirements for becoming FRTB trading desks, and 
performed separate internal back-testing on them. 





This is without prejudice to the requirement for the internal model validation 
function to perform back-testing on both actual and hypothetical P&L under 
Article 
369(2) of the CRR, which the ECB understands as relating to the top-of-
the-house level. 



The ECB considers it best practice that the internal back-testing defined above 
in this paragraph is performed on a daily basis in order align it with the 
regulatory back-testing programme.38 


38 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
23(2)(b) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


39 
See Kupiec, P.H., “Techniques for verifying the accuracy of risk measurement models”, Journal of 
Derivatives, Vol. 
3, Issue 
2, 1995, pp. 
73-84. 


40 
See Christoffersen, P., “Evaluating interval forecasts”, International Economic Review, Vol. 
39, Issue 
4, 
1998, pp. 
841-862. 


41 
The probability integral transformation states that for a continuous random distribution 𝑋, applying the 
cumulative distribution function (CDF) of 𝑋, 𝐹𝑋, on 𝑋 yields a uniform distribution. By negation, if the 
resulting distribution is not uniform, 𝐹𝑋 is not the CDF of 𝑋. 
Given a vector of simulated P&L (used to estimate the VaR) sorted in ascending order, 𝑥1,…,𝑥𝑛, the 
p-value, 𝑝(𝑥), corresponding to a given P&L, 𝑥, should be obtained in the following way: 
𝑝(𝑥)=
{ 
𝑥𝑘+1−𝑥
𝑥𝑘+1−𝑥𝑘
⋅𝑝𝑘+𝑥−𝑥𝑘
𝑥𝑘+1−𝑥𝑘
⋅𝑝𝑘+1if 𝑥𝑘≤𝑥≤𝑥𝑘+1 for 𝑘=1,…,𝑛−1(
𝑝11−𝑝1)
𝑥
𝑥11+(
𝑝11−𝑝1)
𝑥
𝑥1if 𝑥<𝑥1(
𝑝𝑛
1−𝑝𝑛
)
𝑥
𝑥𝑛
1+(
𝑝𝑛
1−𝑝𝑛
)
𝑥
𝑥𝑛
if 𝑥>𝑥𝑛 
where 𝑝𝑘=𝑘
𝑛+1 


42 
If an institution has a model based on a mixture of approaches in several VaR model components, the 
most material approach should be used. 


92. The ECB understands that Article 
369(2) of the CRR requires that the back-
testing performed in internal validation complies with the same requirements as 
the regulatory back-testing regarding the calculation of actual and hypothetical 
P&L. Therefore, the requirements described in Section 
3 regarding the 
calculation of actual and hypothetical P&L should also be applied to internal 
back-testing, in order to ensure consistency. In verifying compliance with this 
provision of the CRR, the ECB will take into account the specific circumstances 
of the institution. 


4.3.2 Tests to be performed in internal back-testing 


93. In accordance with Article 
369(1)(b) of the CRR, institutions must carry out their 
own internal model validation tests, including back-testing. The ECB considers 
it best practice that the periodic internal validation tests include the following (or 
their equivalent) for at least the top-of-the-house level: 
(a) statistical tests on the overshootings, such as the Kupiec (1995)39 and 
Christoffersen (1998)40 tests, including an analysis of the validity of the 
hypotheses underlying those statistical tests; 
(b) a test on the uniformity of the distribution of the p-values41 of the daily 
actual P&L and the hypothetical P&L in the daily forecasts of P&Ls of the 
VaR42 engine, at least for the daily data of the last year. For example, a 
P&L value equal to the VaR at confidence level of 99% corresponds to a 
p-value of 0.01. 



94. In order to assess whether the periodic internal validation tests used by an 
institution are adequate and fit for their purpose, the ECB can, on the basis of 



Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require the institution to provide the following 
information: 
(a) for the top-of-the-house level, the complete economic P&L, hypothetical 
P&L, actual P&L, and VaR time series of at least one year, but preferably 
three years; 
(b) for the top-of-the-house level, the number of overshootings and the 
corresponding dates when they occurred over at least the last year, but 
preferably over the last three years; 
(c) for the top-of-the-house level, for the overshootings (i.e. 
−P&L𝑡+1>VaR𝑡 
where VaR𝑡>0 by convention), the time series of at least one year, but 
preferably three years, of the loss overshooting ratio (LOR) defined as: 
(d) for the top-of-the-house level, the time series of p-values of the daily actual 
P&L and the hypothetical P&L in the daily forecasts of P&Ls of the VaR 
engine of at least one year, but preferably three years; 
(e) for the more granular levels referred to in paragraph 
91: 
(i) complete economic P&L, hypothetical P&L and VaR time series of at 
least one year, but preferably three years; 
(ii) an analysis of all overshootings, including an explanation of the 
cause of the overshooting over the hypothetical P&L and an 
assessment of the model adequacy on the relevant level. 








LOR=
−P&L𝑡+1−VaR𝑡
VaR𝑡
, where −P&L𝑡+1>VaR𝑡; 


4.4 Validation on hypothetical portfolios 


95. In accordance with Article 
369(1) of the CRR, institutions must have processes 
in place to ensure that all their internal models for market risk have been 
adequately validated. Therefore, the requirement of Article 
369(1)(c) to use 
hypothetical portfolios in the internal model validation refers in particular to VaR, 
sVaR, and IRC models. 
96. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, institutions must have a 
documented set of internal policies and controls in place concerning the overall 
operation of their internal models, including the internal validation. Therefore, 
institutions should have a policy in place that governs the overall processes 
related to the validation of their internal models for market risk using 
hypothetical portfolios. The ECB considers that in order to cover the overall 
process, such a policy should comprise the following aspects: 
(a) portfolio definition 
– the processes for defining hypothetical portfolios; 






(b) analysis 
– the processes for analysing the performance of the model 
based on the results of the tests performed on hypothetical portfolios, 
including: 
(i) an assessment of the ability of the models to capture the risk of the 
hypothetical portfolios; 
(ii) verification that the insights gained by the analysis of hypothetical 
portfolios are reflected in the models; 
(iii) in particular, for back-testing on hypothetical portfolios, an 
identification of the market movements and parameters causing 
overshootings; 



(c) reporting 
– the processes to ensure that the results of validation on 
hypothetical portfolios are reported to a management body with sufficient 
authority in respect of internal models. 





97. In accordance with Article 
369(1)(c) of the CRR, institutions must conduct 
validation exercises using hypothetical portfolios in order to ensure that a model 
is able to account for particular structural features.43 The ECB understands that 
these hypothetical portfolios should have targeted compositions so that the 
model can be tested at a level of granularity that enables the identification and 
isolation of specific model performance for those structural features (for 
example, related to specific business lines, instrument features, and/or trading 
strategies). 
98. As they should ensure that the risk model is validated for the institution’s risk 
management purposes, such hypothetical portfolios should be designed in line 
with the business model of the institution. For example, it is not necessary to 
include products that are not covered by trader mandates, nor to test specific 
features that are not relevant for potential positions according to the institution’s 
approved trading strategy. Consequently, an institution should review the 
hypothetical portfolios in the event of a change in its business model or trading 
strategy. 
99. For the same reason, the number of hypothetical portfolios should be 
commensurate with the nature, scale and complexity of the activities of the 
institution. 


43 
These hypothetical portfolios should not be limited to portfolios defined in the benchmarking exercises 
for market risk conducted by the EBA or the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, as those 
portfolios cannot account for all relevant particular structural features. Participation in such 
benchmarking exercises is thus not sufficient to meet the requirements of this section of the guide. 


4.5 Validation based on hypothetical portfolios for VaR models by 
internal back-testing 


100. The ECB considers that the validation requirements of Article 
369(1)(c) of the 
CRR for VaR models can be fulfilled by internal back-testing where an 



institution can demonstrate that it has set up internal back-testing for the VaR 
model using sub-portfolios at a level which is sufficiently granular to account for 
the particular structural features that may arise in its portfolios. 
101. Where an institution performs internal back-testing on hypothetical portfolios for 
the VaR model, the P&L calculations for this back-testing of hypothetical 
portfolios should not differ from the P&L calculations for regulatory VaR back-
testing as described in Section 
3, in order to ensure consistency. This back-
testing can be conducted based on the hypothetical P&L only, as hypothetical 
portfolios are not part of the daily trading activity and therefore the actual P&L is 
not relevant. 
102. As the purpose of such internal back-testing is the internal validation of the VaR 
model, the ECB considers that in order to ensure consistency: 
(a) the comparison should be carried out using the daily hypothetical P&L and 
the one-day VaR; 
(b) back-testing periods for hypothetical portfolios should cover at least the 
period used to calibrate the VaR as of the validation date, to ensure that 
the results are relevant for the model at that date; 
(c) institutions should ensure that the particular structural feature, as referred 
to in paragraph 
97, for which each hypothetical portfolio was selected, 
continues to be in place over time and during the entire historical period for 
which the back-testing is performed. 





5 Methodology for VaR and stressed VaR 


5.1 Regulatory references 


Table 28 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

365 

 

366 

(2) 

367, 368, 369, 370 

 

SSM Regulation 

15/10/2013 

10 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

EBA Guidelines on sVaR44 

16/05/2012 

 

6,10 

Final draft RTS on assessment methodology 
for IMA and significant share 

22/11/2016 

38 

(1), (2) 

49 

(2) 



44 
EBA Guidelines on Stressed Value At Risk (Stressed VaR) (EBA/GL/2012/2), referred to in this guide 
as the “EBA Guidelines on sVaR”. 


 



Once adopted by the European Commission, the Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share will become an 
additional relevant regulatory reference. Currently that document only exists in 
a final draft version. 


5.2 General requirements 


103. In accordance with Article 
369(1) of the CRR, the appropriateness of any 
assumptions made within the internal model must be demonstrated. Therefore, 
institutions should demonstrate the appropriateness of any assumptions about 
the distribution of risk factors included in the VaR and sVaR models on the 
basis of objective data.45 In order to assess the appropriateness of the 
distribution assumptions, the ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM 
Regulation, require institutions to consider different plausible distribution 
assumptions and compare the VaR and sVaR amounts calculated according to 
those different assumptions to demonstrate that the selected assumption is 
appropriate. 
104. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR, an internal model must be 
reasonably accurate in measuring risks. Therefore, when using Monte Carlo 
simulations, institutions should be able to demonstrate that the number of 
simulations used to compute the VaR and sVaR is sufficient to produce 
accurate and stable VaR and sVaR numbers. 
105. An institution may apply different methodologies (i.e. 
the absolute, relative or 
mixed approach46) to calculate returns used to calibrate the VaR and sVaR 
models for different risk factors. The ECB has observed that the best practices 
used in the VaR and sVaR models are the following methodologies: 


45 
Where an institution applies historical returns in its model, the requirement refers to the choice of the 
specific methodology to determine the returns (for example, the use of relative or absolute returns). 


46 
Either of the two examples following could be considered as a “mixed approach”: (i) 
the case where 
some risk factors within a given risk factor category are calculated via absolute returns while others 
within the same risk factor category are calculated via relative returns (e.g. 
interest rate curves with low 
interest rate levels calculated via absolute returns and interest rate curves of other currencies with 
higher levels via relative returns); or (ii) 
the case where a single methodology takes into account 
different regimes (e.g. 
return close to absolute for low levels of interest rates and close to relative for 
higher levels). 


Table 29 


Risk factor category 

Methodology used to calculate returns 

Interest rate curves 

Absolute or mixed approach 

Bond spread 

Absolute or mixed approach 

Credit default swap (CDS) spread 

Absolute or mixed approach 

Foreign exchange rate 

Relative approach 

Equities spot 

Relative approach 

Commodities 

Relative approach 



 



As institutions are required under Article 
368(3) of the CRR to apply best 
practices, they should be able to explain deviations from these methodologies 
and quantify the impact of those deviations. 


Article 
365(2) of the CRR requires that the calculation of the sVaR is made in 
accordance with the requirements for calculation of the VaR. Therefore, for a 
given risk factor, where a specific methodology is used in the VaR, the same 
methodology is expected to be used for the same risk factor in the sVaR. 


As regime changes could occur between the VaR effective historical 
observation period and the sVaR historical period, the method should be 
suitable for both periods. In accordance with Article 
369(1) of the CRR, the 
appropriateness of any assumptions made within the internal model must be 
demonstrated. The ECB considers that this choice of method is one of the 
assumptions whose appropriateness should be demonstrated. 


106. In accordance with Article 
368(1) of the CRR, the internal model must be 
conceptually sound and implemented with integrity. Therefore, it is expected 
that the returns are calculated on the basis of one single holding period (for 
example, one day or ten days) for all risk factors.47 
107. Under paragraph 
10.3(c) of the EBA Guidelines on sVaR, institutions should be 
able to prove that on the day of the week chosen for the sVaR calculation their 
portfolio is representative of the portfolio held during that week, and that the 
chosen portfolio does not lead to a systematic underestimation of the sVaR 
numbers when computed weekly; shown, for example, by using sensitivities or 
by proving that the VaR is not systematically lower on the day of the week 
chosen for sVaR. 
108. In order to assess that the day of the week when the sVaR amounts are 
calculated does not lead to material bias, the ECB can, on the basis of 
Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require an institution to recalculate the sVaR 
for 15 
consecutive business days (including three reporting days). If it is not 
possible to perform this calculation in the production environment, it can be 
performed in a test environment that replicates the calculation of the regulatory 
sVaR. 
109. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, institutions must ensure 
compliance with a documented set of internal controls. In order for the ECB to 
assess compliance with this requirement, an institution should be able to 
provide an inventory of all open validation findings in relation to the VaR and 
sVaR models including, for each finding, a description thereof, the envisaged 
remedial action and the target date for closure of the finding. In addition, 
institutions should retain closed validation findings for at least one year after the 
closure date and should be able to provide a description of the remedial action 
implemented. Furthermore, to allow the ECB to assess compliance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, an institution should be able to provide an inventory of 


47 
Uniform use of a one-day holding period in VaR and a 10-day holding period in sVaR might be 
permissible if adequately justified by an institution. 



analyses that have been conducted with the purpose of developing the VaR and 
sVaR models. 


5.3 Data inputs, length of the time series used to calibrate VaR and 
sVaR, and quantile estimation 


110. In accordance with Article 
365(1)(d) of the CRR, institutions must use an 
effective historical observation period of at least one year for the calculation of 
the VaR, except where a shorter observation period is justified by a significant 
upsurge in price volatility. The ECB considers that this requirement can be 
fulfilled by taking returns referring to 250 
consecutive business days48 in order 
to allow alignment with the time frame referred to in Article 
366(2) of the CRR. 
The ECB understands that an effective historical observation period of at least 
one year means that the average time lag49 of the scheme used by an 
institution is at least the average time lag for an equally weighted observation 
period of one year (i.e. 
125.5 
days for 250 
business days).50 
111. Where the institution uses a shorter effective historical observation period (for 
example, by applying a weighting scheme) due to a significant upsurge in price 
volatility, the ECB considers that this should not lead to a lower VaR risk 
number. Therefore, the institution should use the higher of the following: 
(a) the VaR amount calculated with an equally weighted historical observation 
period of at least one year; 
(b) the VaR amount calculated with the shorter effective historical observation 
period.51 





48 
The observation period corresponds to the time frame between the first day of calculation of returns 
and the last day of calculation of returns. Where an institution uses 10-day returns, the minimum 
observation period is 250 
business days but the time frame between the first day of calculation of the 
first 10-day return and the end date of the last 10-day return is 260 
days. 


49 
A weighting scheme is considered to be the set of weights directly or implicitly applied to observations 
of a risk factor, {𝑤𝑡}𝑡=1,2,…, where typically for giving more weight to more recent observations 𝑤𝑡≥
𝑤𝑡+1∀𝑡, and 𝑡 is the lag in number of business days between the VaR or sVaR computation date and 
the historical observation date. The average time lag using the most recent 𝑛 observations is defined 
as: 


 
Average 
time 
lag(𝑛,𝑤)=
Σ𝑡⋅𝑤𝑡
𝑛𝑡
=1Σ𝑤𝑡
𝑛𝑡
=1 


 
This definition can be extended to equally weighted schemes by setting 𝑤𝑖=1 for all dates. For an 
equally weighted scheme on 250 
continuous business days, the formula results in 125.5 
days. 


 
The ECB may, after analysing the particular circumstances of an institution, also consider other 
methods of processing market data or risk factors to be a weighting scheme, and assess whether such 
methods provide an effective historical observation period of at least one year in accordance with 
Article 
365(1)(d) of the CRR. 


50 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
38(1) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


51 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
38(1) and (2) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


In accordance with Article 
365(1)(e) of the CRR, this comparison should be 
performed at least monthly, and the institution should continue to apply the 
resulting calibration method until the next comparison. 



112. For the purpose of the regulatory back-testing conducted under Article 
366 of 
the CRR, the higher of the two metrics mentioned in paragraph 
111 should be 
used for consistency with the own funds requirement calculation. 


If the institution always uses a VaR calculated with the shorter effective 
observation period as mentioned in paragraph 
111 for its risk management, the 
institution is allowed to perform internal back-testing of the VaR under 
Article 
369(1)(b) of the CRR using this shorter effective observation period, in 
order to ensure that the model is closely integrated into the daily risk 
management process. 


113. In accordance with Article 
365(2) of the CRR, the institution must calculate the 
sVaR calibrated to historical data from a continuous 12-month period of 
significant financial stress relevant to the institution's portfolio. The ECB 
considers that this requirement can be fulfilled by taking returns referring to 250 
consecutive business days in order to allow alignment with the time frame 
referred to in Article 
366(2) of the CRR. 


Under paragraph 
6.8 of the EBA Guidelines on sVaR, no weighting of historical 
data should be applied when determining the relevant historical period or when 
calibrating the sVaR model.52 The ECB considers that a calibration to historical 
data from a continuous 12-month period implies that no weighting scheme 
should be applied to the historical data used to calibrate the sVaR.53 


52 
Under paragraph 
10.10 of the EBA Guidelines on sVaR, this does not contradict the requirement that 
the sVaR methodology should be based on the current VaR methodology. 


53 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
49(2)(h) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


114. In order to ensure that the approach for measuring empirical correlations is 
sound and implemented with integrity as required by Article 
367(3) of the CRR, 
the institution should use one single observation period (i.e. 
with the same start 
date and end date, and consequently the same length of observation period) for 
all risk factors modelled in the VaR. This also applies to the sVaR. 
115. Consequently, if a new instrument (e.g. 
a single stock or credit index series) is 
issued, the time series corresponding to this instrument should not be used on 
its own for the calibration of the VaR and sVaR models until the length of the 
available time series reaches the length of the observation period used by the 
institution. In this case, because, at the least, the missing portion needs to be 
completed, a risk factor calibrated to this time series is considered to be proxied 
and the requirements for proxies should be observed (see Section 
5.5). 
116. In accordance with Article 
365 of the CRR, the VaR and sVaR are calculated as 
the 99th percentile, one-tailed confidence interval, and In accordance with 
Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, the model must accurately capture all material 
price risks. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR, any internal model 
must have a proven track record of reasonable accuracy in measuring risks. 
Therefore, the ECB considers that for institutions using a simulation approach 
(either historical or Monte Carlo) in their VaR (or sVaR) model, the percentile 



estimation method used to obtain the 99th percentile should be based on 
reasonable statistical properties that ensure its accuracy 
– that is, it should be 
asymptotically unbiased, distribution-free, and assume that the probability of 
experiencing a P&L lower (or higher) than the lowest (or highest) simulated 
value is strictly greater than zero. For these reasons the ECB considers that 
both the method proposed by Harrell and Davis54 55 and the simplified method 
proposed below56 are appropriate methods to ensure that price risks are 
accurately captured when using the percentile estimation method. 


54 
See Harrell, F.E. and Davis, C.E., “A new distribution-free quantile estimator”, Biometrika, Vol. 
69, 
1982, pp. 
635-640. 


55 
Corresponding to estimator 
9 in Dielman, T., Lowry C. and Pfaffenberger, R., “A comparison of quantile 
estimators”, Communications in Statistics. Simulation and Computation, Vol. 
23(2), 1994, pp. 
355-371. 


56 
Corresponding to definition 
6 in Hyndman, R.J. and Fan, Y., “Sample quantiles in statistical packages”, 
American Statistician, Vol. 
50, 1996, pp. 
361-365. 


57 
P&L1 is the lowest P&L (i.e. 
the highest loss). 


Consider the vector of simulated P&L of length 𝑛 for the VaR (or sVaR) 
percentile estimation (P&L1 to P&L𝑛) in ascending order.57 The result 𝑄(0.99) 
is obtained as the weighted average of the two subsequent P&L values 
−P&LInt(𝑚) and −P&LInt(𝑚)+1, computed as 


Q(0.99)= (m−Int(m))⋅(−P&LInt(m)+1)+(Int(m)−m+1)⋅(−P&LInt(m)) , 


with 𝑚=
𝑛+1100. 


For example: 
for 𝑛=250, the percentile result of this method is 
0.51 × (−P&L3)+ 0.49 × (−P&L2); 


for 𝑛=260, the percentile result of this method is 
0.61 × (−P&L3)+ 0.39 × (−P&L2). 


5.4 Data quality 


117. In accordance with Article 
367(2)(e) of the CRR, an internal model must meet 
minimum data standards. This applies in particular to risk factor time series, 
which are fundamental inputs to a VaR model. For each risk factor time series 
used to calibrate the shocks of the VaR model, the institution should have a 
process in place to regularly check the quality of the time series. The ECB 
considers that an appropriate minimum frequency of such checks is quarterly, 
as this allows alignment with the regulatory reporting cycle. This is without 
prejudice to the discretion of institutions to perform certain checks on a more 
frequent basis if needed to meet minimum data standards. Where an institution 
uses different data sources for its VaR model and the daily economic P&L 
calculation reflected in the inventory referred to in paragraph 
130, the ECB may 
request that the institution explain the differences between the two sets of data 
sources, in order to verify that they meet minimum data standards. 



118. The ECB understands that the minimum data standards should ensure that the 
true volatility of a position or portfolio is captured. Therefore, the quality checks 
on the risk factor time series should, at the minimum, identify for each time 
series: 
(a) the number of days for which data points were initially missing and then 
filled using a particular methodology (e.g. 
interpolation and 
extrapolation);58 
(b) the number of days for which data points were initially available and were 
replaced using a particular methodology (e.g. 
interpolation and 
extrapolation); 
(c) the number of days with no daily changes; 
(d) the maximum number of consecutive days with no daily change. 



119. Material or large numbers of changes in the time series may affect the ability to 
capture the true volatility of a position or portfolio. In order to monitor and 
ensure that the operation of the internal model is not adversely affected, 
institutions should maintain up-to-date documentation59 describing any changes 
in the risk factor time series, including in particular any methodology for the 
replacement of missing data, and the list of tasks that may be performed during 
manual adjustments. This documentation should contain the following: 
(a) a description of the methodology followed to introduce the adjustment 
– 
the description should be sufficiently detailed so that any staff member of 
the unit in charge is able to produce the same outcome; 
(b) a description of the processes in place to ensure the appropriate 
implementation of a manual process in accordance with the 
documentation. 



120. In accordance with Article 
367(2)(e) of the CRR, the institution's internal model 
must conservatively assess the risk arising from less liquid positions and 
positions with limited price transparency and must meet minimum data 
standards. Therefore, the ECB considers that institutions should have in place 
documentation which defines the minimum data quality standards that risk 
factor time series should meet, and be able to provide justification for the use of 
time series that include an elevated number of consecutive business days with 
missing data or no daily changes. Moreover, the ECB considers that when 
using time series with only a low number of available data points per year 
institutions should provide justification that the number of data points is 
sufficient to reflect the true volatility of a position or portfolio. 
121. In order to ensure that changes in the risk factor time series do not affect the 
ability to capture the true volatility of a position or portfolio, institutions should 


58 
There should be no missing data points for the final time series of shocks used to calibrate the model. 


59 
In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR. 



analyse how the replacement of missing data affects the volatilities and 
correlations of the IMA. This applies particularly where time series are used that 
have: 
(a) the value of the same data of the previous day in the case of automatic 
and systematic replacement of missing data points; 
(b) an elevated number of consecutive business days with missing data or no 
daily changes; 
(c) only a low number of data points per year before any data cleaning or 
treatment. 





Filtering of data or exclusions of outliers should not be performed unless the 
institution can demonstrate that the excluded data points correspond to 
erroneous or stale data and do not represent the real market volatility of the risk 
factors. As part of the requirement under Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR to have 
procedures for ensuring compliance with controls concerning the overall 
operation of internal models, the ECB considers that institutions should keep 
track of any exclusion made in the risk factor time series used to calculate VaR 
and sVaR. 


122. Conversely, automatic and systematic filtering of data leading to exclusions of 
high or low returns should not be performed without further analysis and 
documentation. 


5.5 Proxies, beta approximation and regressions 


123. For the purposes of this guide, the ECB understands that market data are 
proxied in the calculation of the VaR or sVaR60 when market data that are used 
as inputs in the pricing model to compute the economic P&L for an IMA position 
are replaced with other market data61 (or a weighted average of market data) 
for the purpose of calibrating the VaR or sVaR (respectively) for that position. 


60 
For the purpose of partial use models this proxy definition should be applied only to market data inputs 
that fall into the approved risk categories of the model. Market data inputs giving rise to risks that are 
out of the scope of the approved risk categories should not automatically be counted as proxied. For 
example, an equity price that is modelled by a regression to an index for a general equity risk model 
(no approval for specific equity risk) should not be counted as proxied. 


61 
If market data used for pricing and VaR calculation only differ in the source (for example, P&L pricing 
uses one source and VaR calculations are based on another source), the data used for risk calculation 
should not be considered as a proxy. In any case, the quality of the data should be checked and the 
sources justified by the institution. 


62 
Examples that could lead to equivalent prices are: (i) 
where the economic P&L is computed by market 
instrument (yield) rates, while the VaR/sVaR is computed based on zero coupon rates; and (ii) 
where a 
price-based economic P&L is used (for example, listed options, or the direct bond price), while the VaR 
uses a model-based P&L. 


Where for the economic P&L a certain market data input (for example, the 
directly observable price of an instrument) is used, while the VaR or sVaR 
model (respectively) uses other market data that would lead to an equivalent 
price, the ECB considers that these data should not be considered as proxies.62 


Conversely, if the data would not lead to an equivalent price, they should be 
considered as proxies. 


In accordance with Article 
367(1)(b) of the CRR, where a risk factor is 
incorporated into the institution's pricing model but not into the risk 
measurement model, the institution must be able to justify such an omission to 
the satisfaction of the competent authority. Therefore, the ECB considers that in 
the event of reduced granularity of market data inputs for curves or surfaces in 
the VaR or sVaR model, as compared with the economic P&L, an institution 
should duly justify why the data points interpolated owing to the reduced 
granularity should not be considered as proxies (e.g. 
by means of equivalent 
price as mentioned above). 


124. In accordance with Article 
370(e) of the CRR, an internal model used for 
specific risk must capture name-related basis risk, and in particular be sensitive 
to material idiosyncratic differences between similar, but not identical, positions. 
The ECB therefore considers that the use of each single stock price (where 
available) as a risk factor in the VaR or sVaR is the best practice for modelling 
specific risk for equity instruments. Similarly, the direct use of idiosyncratic 
market data (where available) (for example, the idiosyncratic bond spread or 
each single-name credit default swap) as a risk factor is considered to be the 
best practice for modelling specific risk for debt instruments. 


However, the use of beta approximations or regressions could be accepted if 
they are documented and regularly validated (i.e. 
they are shown to lead to 
good model performance) as required by Articles 
368(1)(e) and 369 of the CRR. 
Institutions with internal model approval for specific risk should be able to 
demonstrate that the idiosyncratic volatility of equity or debt instruments with 
specific risk is correctly taken into account in the VaR and sVaR models. 


125. The ECB considers that in order to demonstrate that the model captures 
accurately all material price risks as required by Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, 
the institution should document and make available upon request an inventory 
of time series of risk factors that are proxied for the calibration of the VaR and 
sVaR models, together with the materiality of the corresponding risk factors. 
126. The ECB considers that the requirement to have a documented set of internal 
policies and controls also applies to the use of proxies, as they are part of the 
overall operation of internal models. Therefore, institutions should have a policy 
in place that defines clear processes for deriving and validating each proxy for 
VaR and sVaR. The policy should further define a set of controls (for example, 
statistical analysis or comparison against alternative proxies) that should be 
performed to ensure the appropriateness of proxies. 
127. As a control to ensure that the proxies are appropriately conservative and are 
reflective of the true volatility where sufficient market data are available, 
institutions should perform analyses to show that the proxy market data (i) 
are 
highly correlated with the market data used for economic P&L, and (ii) 
show a 
similar level of volatility for VaR and sVaR. Where analyses based on market 



data used for economic P&L are not feasible, institutions should at least assess 
alternative plausible proxy choices. 


In particular, institutions which have approved internal models for specific risk of 
debt instruments or specific risk of equity instruments should demonstrate that 
the use of a proxy enables the idiosyncratic risk to be appropriately captured as 
required by Article 
370(e) of the CRR. 


128. As proxies are part of the internal models, any proxy should also be validated 
for VaR and sVaR at least annually in accordance with Section 
4.2 on the 
frequency of regular internal validation. 
129. In order to assess that proxies are appropriately conservative and reflective of 
the true volatility, the ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, 
require an institution to provide, for a selection of sub-portfolios, business days, 
and material proxies: 
(a) the hypothetical P&L used for regulatory back-testing; 
(b) the hypothetical P&L calculated on the same unchanged positions but 
replacing, for the positions for which proxies are used in the VaR, the 
market data with the market data of their proxies; 
(c) the hypothetical P&L calculated on the same unchanged positions but 
replacing, for the positions for which proxies are used in the sVaR, the 
market data with the market data of their proxies. 





The specific information required will depend on the results of the institution’s 
analysis of the appropriateness of the proxies. 


5.6 Risk factors in the model 


130. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(b) of the CRR, the VaR and sVaR models 
must capture a sufficient number of risk factors, depending on the level of 
activity of the institution in the respective markets. Where a risk factor is 
incorporated into the institution’s pricing model (referred to as “market data 
input” for the purposes of this guide) but not into the risk measurement model, 
the institution must be able to justify such an omission to the satisfaction of the 
competent authority. 


So that it can assess compliance with this requirement, the ECB considers that 
an institution should be able to provide an inventory of all the market data inputs 
to the economic P&L and of all the risk factors used in the VaR and sVaR 
models. This inventory should include a comprehensive mapping between the 
market data used to calculate the economic P&L and the corresponding risk 
factors included in the VaR and sVaR model. The inventory should contain at 
least the following information: 



(a) a list of the market data inputs used in the calculation of the institution’s 
economic P&L;63 
(b) for each market data input, information confirming: 
(i) whether the market data input is directly modelled in the VaR engine 
(i.e. 
whether it is a risk factor of the model and involves no use of a 
proxy); 
(ii) whether the market data input is proxied in the VaR calculation; 
(iii) whether the market data input is modelled (or not) in the VaR engine; 
(iv) where relevant, how the market data input is proxied in the VaR 
calculation (for example, by one market data input or by a 
combination of several market data inputs in a regression approach). 








63 
For example, inputs in institutions’ pricing models for economic P&L. 


64 
This should be identical to the pricing function used to calculate the hypothetical P&L under 
paragraph 
75. 


A similar inventory should be provided for the sVaR model where relevant. 


131. Identical underlyings should always be mapped to the same risk factor in order 
to ensure consistency within the model. 
132. In order to assess whether VaR and sVaR models capture a sufficient number 
of risk factors and to assess the materiality of missing risk factors, the ECB can, 
on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions to provide, 
for a selection of sub-portfolios, business days, and missing risk factors: 
(a) the hypothetical P&L used for regulatory back-testing as defined in 
Section 
3.5; 
(b) the P&L calculated assuming simultaneously: 
(i) unchanged positions and omitting the changes in value of the missing 
risk factors of the VaR and sVaR; 
(ii) use of the pricing method and model parametrisation used to 
compute the economic P&L.64 








5.7 Pricing functions and methods in the model 


133. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, models must capture 
accurately all material price risks. In addition, in accordance with 
Article 
368(1)(e) and (f) of the CRR, institutions must have a set of documented 
procedures and controls concerning the overall operations of their internal 
models, and those models must have a proven track record of reasonable 
accuracy in measuring risks. Therefore, institutions should be able to produce 
and update, on a regular basis, an inventory of all the VaR and sVaR pricing 



functions and methods, and the pricing functions and methods used in the 
economic P&L. This inventory should include a comprehensive mapping 
between the pricing functions and methods used in VaR and sVaR and the 
pricing functions and methods used for the daily economic P&L. It should 
include the following information at the relevant level of granularity: 
(a) the pricing functions and methods, and pricing functions and methods 
parametrisation (for example, the number of Monte Carlo simulations) 
used to calculate the daily economic P&L; 
(b) the scope of instrument types covered by each pricing function and 
method used to calculate the daily economic P&L; 
(c) a meaningful indication of the materiality of positions priced with the 
corresponding pricing function and method, for example the number of 
individual positions, as well as the total amount of outstanding notional and 
market value covered by each pricing function and method used to 
calculate the daily economic P&L; 
(d) corresponding pricing functions and methods as well as the pricing 
functions and methods parametrisation (for example, the number of Monte 
Carlo simulations) used in the VaR engine; 
(e) a self-assessment by the institution, including a scorecard indicator (green, 
amber, red)65 of the appropriateness of VaR pricing methods (VaR engine 
pricing versus daily economic P&L pricing). 





65 
The scorecard indicators are: green 
– fully appropriate; amber 
– acceptable; red 
– weakness detected. 


66 
The validation of pricing functions used for economic P&L purposes is expected to be regularly 
performed by an institution and thus is the basis for this additional requirement. 


The criteria for assessing this scorecard indicator should be described in an 
internal policy. 


A similar inventory should be available for the sVaR model, where relevant. 


The ECB considers that an appropriate frequency for updating this inventory is 
at least annually, so that it can be used in the annual review of the institution’s 
overall risk management process as referred to in Article 
368(2) of the CRR. 


134. This inventory should be reviewed at least annually by a unit independent of the 
one that produces it (for example, the internal audit function or internal 
validation function). This review should check the quality, reliability and 
comprehensiveness of the information provided in the inventory. 
135. As for any other assumption in an internal model, the differences in the pricing 
functions and methods used for the calculation of the VaR and sVaR, compared 
with those used for the calculation of the economic P&L, should be subject to 
validation66 in accordance with Article 
369(1) of the CRR. This validation should 
include any simplifications of pricing functions and methods introduced for use 
for VaR or sVaR-related purposes (for example, a reduced number of 



parameters or simulations). The validation should be performed at least initially 
when a pricing method is introduced into the VaR or sVaR calculation that is not 
identical to the one for economic P&L purposes, and should assess the impact 
of the use of different pricing methods. Additionally, a regular validation should 
be performed in order to check that this impact remains low. The scorecard 
indicator mentioned above should be based on the results from this (initial and 
regular) validation. The institution should develop a work plan to mitigate the 
risk or improve the quality of any pricing functions or methods that are deemed 
inadequate according to the institution’s assessment in the scorecard (i.e. 
a red 
indicator). 
136. In order to assess the accuracy and appropriateness of the pricing functions 
and methods in the VaR and sVaR models, the ECB can, on the basis of 
Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions to provide, for a selection 
of sub-portfolios, business days, and pricing functions/methods: 
(a) the hypothetical P&L used for regulatory back-testing as defined in 
Section 
3.5; 
(b) the P&L, calculated on the same unchanged positions, by using the pricing 
functions and methods used to compute the VaR and sVaR numbers with 
the market data input used for the hypothetical P&L. 





This information allows assessment of the isolated impact on the hypothetical 
P&L of using the pricing functions and methods in VaR and sVaR calculations, 
instead of those in the economic P&L. 



6 Methodology for IRC models focusing on default risk 


6.1 Regulatory references 


Table 30 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/07/2013 

4 

(1) 

153,336 

 

367 

(1),(4) 

368 

 

369 

(1) 

370 

 

372 

(a), (d) 

373 

 

374 

(2), (4) 

375 

(1) 

376 

(2), (3), (6) 

SSM Regulation 

15/10/2013 

10 

 

Other references 

 

 

 

EBA Guidelines on the IRC 

16/05/2012 

 

17, 25, 29 

Final draft RTS on assessment methodology 
for IMA and significant share 

22/11/2016 

63 

(4)(b) 

65 

(3) 

70 

(3) 



 


Once adopted by the European Commission, the Final draft RTS on 
assessment methodology for IMA and significant share will become an 
additional relevant regulatory reference. Currently that document only exists in 
a final draft version. 


6.2 General requirements 


137. Under paragraph 
29.2 of the EBA Guidelines on the IRC, institutions should be 
able to prove that, on the day of the week chosen for the IRC calculation, their 
portfolio is representative of the portfolio held during the week and that the 
chosen portfolio does not lead to a systematic underestimation of the IRC 
numbers when computed weekly (for example, by using sensitivities or jump-to-
default). 
138. In order to assess that the day of the week when the IRC numbers are 
calculated does not lead to material bias, the ECB can, on the basis of 
Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require an institution to recalculate the IRC for 
15 
consecutive business days (including three reporting days). If it is not 
possible to perform this calculation in the production environment, it can be 



performed in a test environment replicating the calculation of the regulatory 
IRC. 
139. In accordance with Article 
374(4) of the CRR, the IRC model must be based on 
the assumptions of a constant level of risk over the one-year time horizon or, 
alternatively, on the assumption of a one-year constant position. As with any 
other modelling assumption, an institution should be able to demonstrate that 
the chosen assumption appropriately captures the risk of its portfolio. 


In order to assess the appropriateness of that choice, the ECB can, on the 
basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require an institution that uses a 
constant level of risk assumption and liquidity horizons shorter than one year to 
calculate the impact of using a constant position assumption on the IRC and the 
default risk in the IRC67 amounts. 


67 
For the purposes of this document, default risk in the IRC means the risk charge calculated with the 
institution’s IRC methodology and on the institution’s current IRC portfolio, but without taking the effect 
of rating migrations into account. Thus, default risk in the IRC is a stand-alone risk number and not the 
default risk contribution to the IRC amount. 


68 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
63(4)(b) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


69 
A simple way of testing the impact of maturity mismatches leading to imbalanced positions may be to 
scale down the PDs and migration of maturing positions, taking into account the reduced time horizon 
until maturity. 


140. In accordance with Article 
375(1) of the CRR, hedging or diversification effects 
associated with long and short positions may only be recognised by explicitly 
modelling gross long and short positions in the different instruments, and 
institutions must reflect the potential for significant basis risks in hedging 
strategies, in particular by maturity. Therefore, the ECB considers that 
irrespective of whether a one-year constant position assumption or a constant 
level of risk assumption is used, institutions should not overestimate 
diversification or hedging effects, and in particular should ensure that maturity 
mismatches between long and short positions occurring within the liquidity 
horizon or within the one-year risk modelling horizon do not lead to an 
underestimation of risk.68 


In accordance with Article 
376(3)(c) of the CRR, as part of the annual 
independent review and the initial and periodic validation of its IRC model, an 
institution must apply appropriate quantitative validation. Therefore, the ECB 
considers that institutions should, as part of the annual independent review and 
the initial and periodic validation of their IRC models, assess quantitatively how 
maturity mismatches 
– that may lead to imbalanced positions within the 
modelling horizon 
– impact the IRC and the default risk in the IRC amounts.69 


141. In accordance with Article 
372(d) in conjunction with Article 
368(1)(f) of the 
CRR, an IRC model must be reasonably accurate in measuring risks. 
Therefore, an institution should be able to demonstrate that the number of 
simulations used in its model to compute the IRC and the default risk in the IRC 
is sufficient to ensure accurate and stable IRC amounts. 



142. In order to assess the accuracy of the IRC calculations, the ECB can, on the 
basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions to calculate a 
confidence interval of IRC estimation with a confidence level of 95%. 
143. Under paragraph 
17.2 of the EBA Guidelines on the IRC, institutions should use 
one (or, where relevant data are available, more than one) migration matrix that 
is specific to sovereign issuers (where relevant). Therefore, institutions should 
use a separate migration matrix for other types of issuers. Where an institution 
uses only one matrix for all types of issuers, it should be able to demonstrate 
that this leads to conservative IRC amounts.70 
144. In accordance with Article 
372(d) in conjunction with Article 
368(1)(e) of the 
CRR, institutions must ensure compliance with a documented set of internal 
controls related to their IRC model. So that the ECB can assess compliance 
with this requirement, an institution should be able to provide an inventory of all 
open validation findings in relation to its IRC model, including a description of 
the finding, the envisaged remedial action and the target date for closure of the 
finding. In addition, institutions should retain closed validation findings for at 
least one year after the closure date and should be able to provide a description 
of the remedial action implemented. Furthermore, to allow the ECB to assess 
compliance with Article 372(d) in conjunction with Article 368(1)(e) of the CRR, 
an institution should be able to provide an inventory of analyses that have been 
conducted with the purpose of developing the IRC model. 


70 
The impact on the default risk in the IRC should also be provided upon request. 


6.3 Data inputs 


145. In accordance with Article 
376(6) of the CRR, an IRC model must meet 
minimum data standards. This applies in particular to time series used to 
calibrate the IRC model, for which the institution should have a process in place 
to check the quality of the time series regularly. The ECB considers that an 
appropriate minimum frequency for checking the quality of the time series is 
quarterly, as this allows alignment with the regulatory reporting cycle. Therefore, 
the data quality requirements for VaR and sVaR models indicated in 
paragraphs 
118 to 119 and 121 to 122 also apply to the market data used for 
calibration of the IRC model. 


6.4 Distribution and correlation assumptions 


146. In accordance with Article 
376(3)(a) of the CRR, an institution must, as part of 
the annual independent review and the initial and periodic validation of its IRC 
model, validate that its modelling approach for correlations and price changes is 
appropriate for its portfolio, including the choice and weights of its systematic 
risk factors. The ECB understands that this provision requires institutions in 
particular to justify (i) 
the choice of systematic factor types (for example, region 



and industry) and, for each type of systematic factor, its granularity, and (ii) 
the 
full correlation structure and its calibration for the entire set of risk factors used. 
147. An institution that does not calibrate the correlations of its IRC model to market 
data, but instead uses internal ratings based (IRB) correlations, should 
demonstrate their appropriateness in relation to its portfolio. The ECB considers 
that owing to the nature of the regulatory trading book, the correlations as 
defined in Article 
153 of the CRR should be used for this purpose. 
148. In accordance with Article 
374(2) of the CRR, correlation assumptions must be 
supported by analysis of objective data in a conceptually sound framework. In 
accordance with Article 
372(d) in conjunction with Article 
369(1) of the CRR, 
institutions must perform tests to demonstrate that any assumptions made 
within the internal model are appropriate. In view of those two provisions, the 
ECB considers that any assumption for correlation modelling made by the 
institution should be supported by objective market data (for example, credit 
default swap data, equities data or rating migrations data) and justified by a 
quantitative analysis as part of its initial and periodic validation process. In 
particular, this quantitative analysis should compare the level of correlation 
between issuers that is derived from the institution’s IRC correlation model and 
from objective market data. The ECB understands that this requirement also 
applies to those institutions using an IRB-based methodology and to those 
using a vendor model. 
149. In order to assess the appropriateness of the modelling approach for 
correlations, the ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, 
require institutions to provide correlations for all issuer pairs, and all relevant 
correlation values according to their factor model, in particular for the 
systematic factors. 
150. In accordance with Article 
374(2) of the CRR, concentrations under stressed 
conditions must be reflected in the correlation assumptions of the IRC model. 
The ECB understands that the use of a short period of data for calibrating the 
correlations implies the risk that stressed conditions are not appropriately 
reflected. Therefore, institutions should be able to justify that stressed 
conditions have been adequately captured and to quantify the impact of using 
sufficiently long time series capturing a relevant stressed period for calibrating 
correlations in the IRC and the default risk in the IRC. In accordance with 
Article 
370(c) of the CRR in conjunction with Article 
372(d) of the CRR, the IRC 
model must be robust to an adverse environment. Therefore, the ECB 
considers that, in order to also ensure a robust calibration of the IRC model, a 
time series of at least 10 
years, capturing a relevant stressed period, is 
appropriate.71 
151. In accordance with Article 
376(3)(b) of the CRR, institutions must perform 
sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis to assess the qualitative and 
quantitative reasonableness of the internal model, particularly with regard to the 


71 
By using proxies if, and where, necessary. 



treatment of concentrations. Because the weights of the systematic risk factors 
are relevant for the modelling of concentrations, the ECB considers that 
institutions should 
– as part of the independent review, and in the initial and 
periodic validation process 
– perform sensitivity analyses for the IRC and the 
default risk in the IRC. In particular, the ECB considers it best practice that this 
sensitivity analysis includes, as a minimum, the following basic analysis, where 
systematic risk factor weights or correlations of risk factors72 in the model are 
shifted up or down by a fixed value or set to generic values: 
(a) all weights of the systematic factors per issuer, for each issuer,73 are 
shifted by +10% in absolute value (not going beyond 100%);74 
(b) all weights of the systematic factors per issuer, for each issuer, are shifted 
by −10% in absolute value (not going below 0%); 
(c) all weights of the systematic factors per issuer, for each issuer, are set to 
0; 
(d) all weights of the systematic factors per issuer, for each issuer, are set to 
1; 
(e) all correlations between systematic factors are set to 100% (weights of 
issuers to their respective systematic factors remain unchanged); 
(f) all correlations between systematic factors are set to 0% (weights of 
issuers to their respective systematic factors remain unchanged). 





72 
The latent variables of the model that determine the correlation of migration and default events of the 
issuers. 


73 
If the asset value 𝐴𝑖 of an obligor 𝑖 is written as follows in a factor model: 𝐴𝑖=√𝜌 i 𝑋𝑖+√1−𝜌 i 𝜉𝑖 
where 𝑋𝑖 is driven by systemic contributions and 𝜉𝑖 is the idiosyncratic noise term, the weights of the 
issuers to their respective systematic factors correspond to √𝜌 i . 


74 
Which reduces the idiosyncratic weight accordingly. 


In order to assess the appropriateness of the sensitivity analysis and scenario 
analysis performed to validate the reasonableness of the internal model, the 
ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions 
to provide the results of the sensitivity analysis as described in this paragraph, 
points (a) to (f). 


152. In order to assess the appropriateness of the modelling approach for 
correlations, and in particular the choice and weights of the systematic risk 
factors, the ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require 
institutions to calculate the IRC and the default risk in the IRC amounts based 
on a one-factor Merton Model (using one single global systematic risk factor) 
and one flat correlation with different correlation assumptions: 0%, 5%,10%, 
15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 45%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%. All other inputs 
into institutions’ IRC models remain unchanged. 
153. In accordance with Article 
374(2) of the CRR, correlation assumptions must be 
supported by analysis of objective data in a conceptually sound framework. In 



accordance with Article 
376(3)(a) of the CRR, an institution must, as part of the 
annual independent review and the initial and periodic validation of its IRC 
model, validate that its modelling approach for correlations is appropriate for its 
portfolio. In accordance with Article 
376(3)(c) of the CRR, institutions must 
apply appropriate quantitative validation. Under paragraph 
25.2(iii) of the EBA 
Guidelines on the IRC, in the validation process the impact of different copula 
assumptions should be analysed, for example by testing the impact of different 
distributional assumptions. Because the copula choice is a key assumption of 
the modelling approach for correlations, the ECB understands that these 
provisions require, in particular, that institutions demonstrate the 
appropriateness of and validate the copula choice of the modelling approach for 
correlations. The copula choice refers to the copula of the joint multivariate 
distribution75 of the risk factors for migration and default and of the joint 
systematic risk factors, where relevant. 
154. In accordance with Article 
376(3)(b) of the CRR, institutions must perform 
sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis to assess the qualitative and 
quantitative reasonableness of the internal model, particularly with regard to the 
treatment of concentrations. Because the copula choice is a key assumption of 
the modelling approach for correlations and is relevant for the modelling of 
concentrations, the ECB considers that institutions should 
– as part of the 
independent review, and in the initial and periodic validation process 
– perform 
sensitivity analyses for different copula assumptions. The ECB considers that 
the following are suitable choices for comparing the impact of different copulas 
on the IRC and the default risk in the IRC with respect to the approved model: 
(a) using a Student-t copula for all issuer risk factors with 8 
degrees of 
freedom; 
(b) where relevant, using a Student-t copula for the systematic risk factors 
with 8 
degrees of freedom; 
(c) using a Student-t copula for all issuer risk factors where the degrees of 
freedom have been calibrated to market data; 
(d) where relevant, using a Student-t copula for the systematic risk factors 
calibrated to market data. 





75 
Sklar’s theorem (in Sklar, A., “Fonctions de répartition à n dimensions et leurs marges”, Publications de 
l’Institut de Statistique de L’Université de Paris, Vol. 
8, 1959, pp. 
229-231) states that every multivariate 
cumulative distribution function of a random vector can be expressed in terms of its marginals and a 
copula. 


This list is without prejudice to the discretion of an institution to perform 
additional analyses on copula choices that it deems more fitting for its particular 
circumstances. 



6.5 Ratings, probabilities of default and recovery rate assumptions 


6.5.1 Documentation requirements 


155. In accordance with Article 
372(d) in conjunction with 368(1)(e) of the CRR, an 
institution must have a documented set of internal policies and controls 
concerning the overall operation of its internal models. The ECB considers that 
for the IRC model institutions should have in place, in particular: 
(a) methodology and process documents for the determination of probabilities 
of default (PDs) and recovery rates (RRs), including a process and 
documentation concerning the fallback approaches applied; 
(b) validation documents demonstrating that the assumptions relating to PDs 
and RRs are appropriate; 
(c) a documented hierarchy of preferred sources for the determination of PDs 
and RRs, which are applied to all issuers and instruments within the scope 
of the IRC model. 



156. In order to assess the appropriateness and implementation of the policies and 
procedures for determining PDs and RRs, the ECB can, on the basis of 
Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions to provide on request a 
complete list of positions in the IRC model, together with the respective issuer 
or obligor ratings, the PDs of the issuer or obligor and the RRs for the positions. 
If the ratings, PDs or RRs have been adjusted or have not been assigned using 
the usual automated process (for example, by manual intervention or deviation 
from the usual automated process), the institution should maintain a complete 
list of such ratings, PDs and RRs, and provide the rationale for the adjustment, 
or (for example) manual intervention or deviation from the usual automated 
process (as applicable) in each case. 


6.5.2 Validation requirements 


157. In accordance with Article 
376(3)(b) of the CRR, institutions must perform 
sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis to assess the qualitative and 
quantitative reasonableness of the internal model. Therefore, the ECB 
considers that institutions should 
– as part of the independent review and in the 
initial and periodic validation process 
– perform sensitivity analyses with respect 
to the PDs and RRs that are applied to assess the quantitative impact in terms 
of the IRC and the default risk in the IRC. In particular, the ECB considers it 
best practice that such sensitivity analysis include, as a minimum, the following 
basic analyses on the main drivers of the IRC model: 
(a) a simultaneous 10% (absolute) up and down shift (not going beyond 0% or 
above 100%) of the RRs used in the portfolio. For models using stochastic 






RRs, institutions are expected to incorporate this impact by adjusting the 
mean of the RR distributions; 
(b) for models using stochastic RRs, a simultaneous 30% (relative) up and 
down shift of the standard deviation of RRs; 
(c) for all the PDs used in the IRC calculation: 
(i) a minimum value of 0.01% for all PDs; 
(ii) a minimum value of 0.03% for all PDs; 
(iii) a simultaneous 10% relative upshift of all PDs; 
(iv) a simultaneous 10% relative downshift of all PDs; 
(v) a simultaneous 1bp absolute upshift of all PDs; 
(vi) a simultaneous 1bp absolute downshift76 of all PDs. 








76 
Not going below zero. 


77 
Given an initial set of migration probabilities, 𝑝1,…,𝑝𝑛, where 𝑝𝑛 corresponds to the PD, the 
probabilities 𝑝𝑖 for 𝑖=1,…,𝑛−1 should be adjusted by 𝑝𝑖
′=𝑝𝑖⋅(1+𝑝𝑛−𝑝𝑛′
1−𝑝𝑛
) where 𝑝𝑛′ 
corresponds 
to the modified PD. 


78 
The same requirements apply to the rating agency data. 


The change in PD should be compensated for by proportionally increasing (or 
decreasing) all the migration probabilities belonging to the same initial rating 
class to maintain the cumulative 100% migration and default probability.77 


As the sensitivity analyses listed above are part of the model validation, 
institutions should take them into account in detail when assessing and 
justifying their PDs and RRs parameters. The assessment should encompass 
an analysis of how the most important issuers and groups of issuers are 
affected by the altered PD and RR values. 


In order to assess the appropriateness of the sensitivity analysis and scenario 
analysis performed to validate the reasonableness of the internal model, the 
ECB can, on the basis of Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require institutions 
to provide the results of the sensitivity analysis described in paragraph 
157(a) to 
(c). 


158. In accordance with Article 
376(2) of the CRR, the IRC model must be based on 
data that are objective and up to date. In accordance with Article 368(1)(a), any 
internal model must be closely integrated into the daily risk management 
process of the institution and serve as the basis for reporting risk exposures to 
senior management. Therefore, the ECB considers that institutions should 
demonstrate, on the basis of objective data, that the PD estimates78 are 
appropriate. Furthermore, where the estimates of PDs are not derived in 
combination with current market prices, institutions should analyse any 
observed differences between these estimates and estimates that are derived 



in combination with current market prices where the relevant corrections were 
performed to obtain real-world PDs. 
159. In accordance with Article 367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model used to 
calculate capital requirements for market risk must capture accurately all 
material price risks. In accordance with Article 368(1) of the CRR, an IRC model 
must be conceptually sound and implemented with integrity. In accordance with 
Article 372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must give a meaningful differentiation 
of risk, and accurate and consistent estimates of incremental default and 
migration risk. Therefore, the ECB considers that institutions should be able to 
show that the statistical methodology used to derive PDs is conceptually sound 
and that PDs are accurate and consistent across all rating grades. The ECB 
considers that an analysis of the expected range of estimation errors should be 
performed, in order to assess the accuracy of the estimates. Furthermore, the 
PD for a rating grade should not be set to zero solely on the basis that no 
defaults have been observed in the past for that rating grade. 
160. In accordance with Article 
373 of the CRR, the IRC model must cover all 
positions that are subject to own funds requirements for specific interest rate 
risk, including those with a 0% specific risk capital charge under Article 
336 of 
the CRR. In accordance with Article 
372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must 
give a meaningful differentiation of risk, and accurate and consistent estimates 
of incremental default and migration risk. In accordance with Article 375(1) of 
the CRR, institutions must reflect the potential for significant basis risks in 
hedging strategies by internal or external rating and other differences in the 
instruments.79 Therefore, the ECB understands that all annual PDs should be 
risk sensitive and greater than zero80 for all obligors. In this context, the term 
“greater than zero” is interpreted to mean greater than, or equal to, one basis 
point. Furthermore, in the ECB’s understanding, “risk sensitive” implies that all 
annual PDs should increase strictly in line with the decreasing creditworthiness 
of the obligor. The ECB also considers that institutions should calculate the PD 
ratios between adjacent rating grades and should justify the ratios that can be 
considered outliers when compared with other ratios or the median of the ratios. 
161. In accordance with Article 376(4) of the CRR, the internal model must be 
consistent with the institution’s internal risk management methodologies for 


79 
These articles are read in conjunction with the CRR requirements regarding the IRB approach: Article 
144(1)(a) of the CRR requires that the institution's rating systems provide for a meaningful assessment 
of obligor and transaction characteristics, a meaningful differentiation of risk, and accurate and 
consistent quantitative estimates of risk; Article 170(1)(c) of the CRR requires that an institution 
documents the relationship between obligor grades in terms of the level of default risk each grade 
implies and the criteria used to distinguish that level of default risk. 


80 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
65(3) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 



identifying, measuring and managing trading risks.81 The ECB considers that 
institutions should identify which terms, information or assumptions in the 
methodology used to estimate PDs for IRC are different from the terms, 
information or assumptions used to account for expected losses. Where they 
differ, institutions should be able to show that the underlying rationale is 
documented and approved by the institution's management body or a 
designated committee thereof and senior management. 
162. In accordance with Article 
376(2) of the CRR, the IRC model must be based on 
data that are objective and up to date. Therefore, the ECB considers that 
institutions should demonstrate, based on objective data, that the RR estimates 
are appropriate. 


81 
This requirement is also supported by the EBA Guidelines on credit institutions’ credit risk management 
practices and accounting for expected credit losses (EBA/GL/2017/06). In accordance with paragraph 
29 of the Guidelines, credit institutions should, to the maximum extent possible, leverage and integrate 
common processes, systems, tools and data that are used within a credit institution to determine if, 
when, and on what terms, credit should be granted; monitor credit risk; and measure allowances for 
both accounting and capital adequacy purposes. In accordance with paragraph 30, a credit institution’s 
allowance methodologies should clearly document the definitions of key terms related to the 
assessment of credit risk and expected credit loss measurement (such as loss and migration rates, 
loss events and default). Where different terms, information or assumptions are used across functional 
areas (such as accounting, capital adequacy and credit risk management), the underlying rationale for 
these differences should be documented and approved by senior management. Information and 
assumptions used for expected credit loss estimates should be reviewed and updated as required by 
the applicable accounting framework. 


(a) 25% for subordinated debt; 
(b) 55% for senior unsecured debt; 
(c) 88.75% for covered bonds; 
(d) 75% for any other product. 


Based on its observations of the practices of the industry, the ECB considers it 
best practice that the RRs do not exceed the following values: 


This does not exclude the possibility that higher RRs may be used, where 
institutions can justify them by objective and up-to-date data in accordance with 
Article 
376(2) of the CRR. This best practice also applies to positions under the 
fallback approach for the RRs (i.e. 
for which no direct data sources are 
available). 


6.5.3 Consistency requirements 


163. In accordance with Article 
372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must give accurate 
and consistent estimates of incremental default and migration risk. Therefore, 
and in order to ensure that institutions do not use different sources for PDs and 
RRs for the sole purpose of reducing their overall own funds requirements for 
market risk, the ECB considers that they should apply consistent sources for 
PDs and RRs in the IRC model. Therefore, institutions using internal ratings 



should use the corresponding internal RRs, and those using external ratings 
should use historical, market implied or market convention RRs.82 


82 
This understanding is also supported by Article 
70(3) of the Final draft RTS on assessment 
methodology for IMA and significant share. 


83 
All issuers have the same weights. 


84 
The PD may be derived from the rating of the issuer by applying the migration matrix of the IRC model. 
In addition, defaulted positions are included in the calculation of the average with a PD equal to 100% 
as issuers subject to the fallback approach could be in default. 


6.5.4 Requirements for PD fallback values 


164. In accordance with Article 
376(6) of the CRR, proxies must be appropriately 
conservative and may be used only where the available data are insufficient. 
The ECB is aware that for positions where a reliable PD assignment is not 
possible due to a lack of adequate data (for example, where no internal or 
external ratings or liquid credit spread time series are available) institutions 
apply a fallback PD value. As fallback PD values are used when the available 
data are insufficient, the ECB considers them as proxies. In order to ensure that 
fallback PDs are appropriately conservative, the ECB considers it best practice 
that the fallback PD assigned to each of those issuers and positions is at least 
equal to the higher of the following. 
(a) The PD that is equivalent to the worst investment grade rating applicable, 
according to the institution’s sources for the determination of PDs 
– those 
institutions using internal rating approaches for the assignment of PDs 
should use the PD that is equivalent to the worst investment grade rating 
in their internal rating scales. 
(b) The equally weighted83 average PD84 of those issuers included in the IRC 
model which are not subject to the fallback approach. Institutions may 
exclude defaulted issuers when calculating the equally weighted average 
PD, provided that they can ensure that the fallback PD is not applied to 
defaulted issuers. 



165. In accordance with Article 
372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must provide a 
meaningful differentiation of risk, and accurate and consistent estimates of risk. 
In accordance with Article 
376(2) of the CRR, the IRC model must be based on 
data that are objective and up to date. Therefore, the ECB considers that 
institutions should periodically assess the materiality of those issuers and 
positions that are assigned a fallback PD in the IRC model. The ECB considers 
that a suitable analysis for this purpose consists of the following: 
(a) comparison of the jump-to-default risk (where applicable, by using the 
average of the RRs in the case of a stochastic RR) of those positions that 
are assigned fallback PDs with the jump-to-default risk of all positions in 
the IRC model; 






(b) calculation of the ratio of the incremental85 IRC contributions and the 
incremental default risk in the IRC contributions of the positions assigned 
fallback PDs, to the IRC number as calculated by the IRC model: 





85 
Risk management literature is not uniform in the use of the terms “incremental” risk number 
(e.g. 
incremental value-at-risk) and “marginal” risk number. We adopt the convention that an 
incremental risk number refers to the exact finite change in a risk number when adding a finite position, 
whereas “marginal” risk number refers to the derivative of a risk number with respect to a position 
(infinitesimal change rate). 


86 
This threshold of 10% is set by analogy with the Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality of 
extensions and changes of the IMA, which establishes 10% as the threshold for assessing materiality. 


87 
When the average PD is used as a fallback approach, institutions should, by analogy, apply this 
requirement (i.e. 
identify the rating grade that is closest to the average PD and shift up and down 
starting from this rating grade). 


IRC (full scope) - IRC (non-fallback for PD)
IRC (full scope)
; 
Default risk in the IRC(full scope) - Default risk in the IRC (non-fallback for PD)
Default risk in the IRC(full scope) 


166. In accordance with Article 
372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must provide a 
meaningful differentiation of risk. The ECB considers that if a significant 
percentage of the IRC is calculated using fallback PDs, there is a risk that the 
IRC model may not provide the meaningful differentiation of risk required. The 
ECB considers that if the percentage of the IRC calculated using fallback PDs is 
larger than 10%,86 the institution should investigate whether additional data 
sources are available to reduce the percentage of issuers subject to the fallback 
PD assignment. 


In accordance with Article 
376(3)(b) of the CRR, institutions must perform 
sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis to assess the qualitative and 
quantitative reasonableness of the internal model. In the event that the resulting 
percentage of the IRC calculated using fallback PDs is larger than 10%, the 
ECB considers that institutions should perform, as part of the independent 
review and validation, a sensitivity analysis for the IRC and the default risk in 
the IRC. In particular, the ECB understands that this requirement implies 
assessing the sensitivity of the IRC and default risk in the IRC amounts by 
assigning one rating grade higher and one rating grade lower than the one used 
in the fallback PD assigned on the basis of paragraph 
164.87 


6.5.5 Requirements for the calculation of losses based on recovery rates 


167. In accordance with Article 
372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must provide 
accurate and consistent estimates of incremental default risk. Therefore, the 
ECB considers that the market value change following the default of an issuer 
should be calculated as the difference between the current market value of the 
position and the expected market value subsequent to default. 
168. In accordance with Article 
372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must provide a 
meaningful differentiation of risk. In accordance with Article 
375(1) of the CRR, 
institutions must reflect the potential for significant basis risks in hedging 



strategies by product, seniority in the capital structure, internal or external 
rating, maturity, vintage and other differences in the instruments. The ECB 
considers that in order to provide a meaningful differentiation of risk and to 
reflect the potential for significant basis risks, recovery rates should at least 
reflect the type of product, including the collateralisation of the position, and its 
seniority in the capital structure. 
169. In accordance with Article 
372(a) of the CRR, the IRC model must provide 
accurate and consistent estimates of incremental default risk. In accordance 
with Article 
372(d) in conjunction with Article 
369(1) of the CRR, institutions 
must demonstrate that any assumptions made within the IRC model are 
appropriate. The ECB considers that this applies also to RRs. An RR measures 
the expected market value subsequent to default of a position as a percentage 
of the base value (for example, notional). For a long credit position (for 
example, the holding of a long bond position) a default of the issuer would lead 
to a loss. For RRs based on notional value, a negative RR indicates a negative 
expected market value subsequent to default, whereas an RR above 100% 
indicates that the expected market value subsequent to default is higher than 
the notional value. The ECB is aware that RRs generally range between 0% 
and 100%. RRs outside this range could indicate that the assumptions made 
within the IRC model are not appropriate 
– because they could imply an 
expected profit subsequent to default 
– and so institutions should be particularly 
prudent in applying such RRs or be able to demonstrate that they are 
conservative. 


6.6 Treatment of groups of connected issuers 


170. In accordance with Article 
374(2) of the CRR, the IRC model must appropriately 
reflect issuer concentrations. As defined in Article 
4(1)(39) of the CRR, two or 
more legal persons in the same group of connected clients constitute a single 
risk, unless it is shown otherwise. The ECB considers that groups of connected 
clients are relevant for modelling issuer concentrations. Therefore, such groups 
should be appropriately reflected in the IRC model and their treatment in the 
model is subject to the same requirements as any other component of the 
model, in particular documentation and validation. 
171. In accordance with Article 
374(2) of the CRR, the IRC model must appropriately 
reflect issuer concentrations. As defined in Article 
4(1)(39) of the CRR, a group 
of connected clients constitute a single risk, unless it is shown otherwise. 
Therefore, the ECB considers that institutions should model issuers and 
obligors in the same group of connected clients as a single risk (this means, for 
example, that in an asset value model they should be modelled as a single 
asset value). However, the existence of different rating grades within a group of 
connected clients indicates the possibility that not all of those in the group 
default or migrate simultaneously. Therefore, the ECB considers that a suitable 
method of modelling is to distinguish within a group of connected clients by sub-
groups of issuers that have the same internal or external rating grade and 



where the default or migration of each sub-group would occur simultaneously in 
the IRC model 
– unless it is demonstrated that another treatment is more 
appropriate in view of the definition in Article 
4(1)(39) of the CRR. 
172. In accordance with Article 
376(3)(a) of the CRR, an institution must, as part of 
the annual independent review and the initial and periodic validation of its IRC 
model, validate that its modelling approach for correlations is appropriate for its 
portfolio. Because modelling groups of connected clients is relevant for 
modelling issuer concentrations and the correlations among them, the ECB 
considers that validation of the modelling of groups of connected clients is part 
of the annual independent review and the initial and periodic validation of the 
institution’s IRC model. 


7 Risks-not-in-the-model engines 


7.1 Regulatory references 


Table 31 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

 

 

103 

(1) 

105 

 

363 

(1) 

366, 367, 368 

 

369 

(1) 

372 

(a) 

377 

 

430 

(1) 

SSM Regulation 

15/10/2013 

10 

 

Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality 
of extensions and changes of the IMA 

04/03/2015 

7a 

(1)(c) 

7b 

 

Annex III 

Part II, Section 2(13) 

Commission Implementing Regulation on 
supervisory reporting88 

17/12/2020 

5 

(a) 



88 
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/451 of 17 December 2020 laying down implementing 
technical standards for the application of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 with regard to supervisory 
reporting of institutions and repealing Implementing Regulation EU No 680/2014 (OJ L 97, 19.3.2021, 
p.1), referred to in this guide as “Commission Implementing Regulation on supervisory reporting”. 


 



7.2 The framework for risks-not-in-the-model engines 


173. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model used to 
calculate capital requirements for market risk must capture accurately all 
material price risks. For IRC models, the accuracy of the risk estimates is also 
required by Article 
372(a) of the CRR. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(b) of 
the CRR, where a risk factor is incorporated into the institution's pricing model 
but not into the risk measurement model, the institution must be able to justify 
such an omission to the satisfaction of the competent authority. In accordance 
with Article 
368(2)(d) of the CRR, the annual review of an institution’s overall 
risk management process must consider the scope of risks captured by the risk 
measurement model. In accordance with Article 
369(1) of the CRR, institutions 
must have processes in place to ensure that all their internal models for market 
risk have been adequately validated to ensure that they are conceptually sound 
and adequately capture all material risks. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of 
the CRR, the institution must have in place established procedures for 
monitoring and ensuring compliance with a documented set of internal policies 
and controls concerning the overall operation of its internal models. 


Based on the provisions referred to above, the ECB considers that the 
processes set out in detail in this section for risks not captured in the model89 
engines (also referred to in this guide as “risks-not-in-the-model engines”, or 
“RNIME”90) are an integral part of the overall processes of the IMA for market 
risks. Therefore, institutions should develop an RNIME framework, the elements 
of which are further elaborated on in the following paragraphs. 


89 
In this section, the generic reference to “model” means a reference to the VaR, sVaR, IRC, and 
comprehensive risk measure (CRM) models for correlation trading portfolios as referred to in 
Article 
377 of the CRR. 


90 
In this document, the abbreviation “RNIME” may be singular or plural depending on whether it refers to 
a single risk, several risks, or collectively all risks not captured in the model engines. 


91 
In order to simplify the diagram, CRM is not explicitly included. It should be treated in the same way as 
IRC. 


174. For the purposes of this guide and in relation to the RNIME framework, the 
following diagram shows schematically different components of the market risk 
own funds requirements and the RNIME framework.91 The ECB considers that 
an internal model comprises all of the required methods, processes, policies, 
controls, and IT systems. Each internal model includes, inter alia, the following 
constituent elements. 
(a) An “engine” 
– that is, the calculation methodology for each risk number, 
referred to collectively as “risk engines”. The ECB understands that 
Articles 
367 and 368 of the CRR refer to an engine as a “risk 
measurement model”. There is one risk engine for each risk number and 
the risk engine is used to compute the daily risk number. Typically, an 
engine models and computes all risks in an integrated manner. However, it 
may comprise several components, for example, a main component for 
the bulk of the risks, and some “satellite” components. A satellite 
component is part of a model engine, typically for a subset of products or 






risk positions, meeting all applicable CRR requirements for risk 
measurement models on an ongoing basis (for example, for particular 
risks not modelled in the main component). In accordance with 
Article 
367(3) of the CRR, institutions may, in any internal model used for 
market risk, use empirical correlations; where they are not used, the model 
uses a simple sum aggregation of these components. 
(b) An RNIME framework relating to all risk engines, in which RNIME are 
identified, quantified, managed and, if appropriate, capitalised by RNIME 
add-ons to the risk exposure amounts. The process for determining 
RNIME add-ons is part of the RNIME framework. An RNIME add-on is 
understood as a temporary risk exposure amount92 that remains in place 
until the corresponding RNIME is incorporated into the model engine(s) in 
a manner compliant with the CRR. The ECB considers that the RNIME 
add-ons are not part of the model engines, and are therefore not included 
in the risk numbers. In particular, RNIME add-ons are not included in the 
VaR number used for regulatory back-testing. 





92 
To be reported in COREP as “Additional risk exposure amount due to Article 
3 CRR” (COREP C02.00 
Row 
760, Column 
010) together with any other own-initiative capital buffers. 
Moreover, there could be supervisory imposed add-ons related to market risk which are not shown in 
the figure. 


Figure 4 
Components of market risk own funds requirements and risk exposure amounts 
(blue filled boxes), internal models (green frames), and RNIME framework (black 
frame) 


 

Market risk 
SA OFRMarket risk IMA OFR 
VaRengine 
sVaRengine 
IRC 
engine 
Internal 
VaRmodel 
Internal 
sVaRmodel 
Internal 
IRC model 
Additional risk 
exposure amount 
due to Art. 3 CRRVaRRNIMEframework 
sVaRRNIMEframework 
IRC RNIMEframework 
RNIMEFramework for 
market risk 
RNIME add-
ons 
Other own-
initiative 
capital buffers 


In accordance with Article 
363(1) of the CRR, institutions may calculate their 
own funds requirements for market risk using their internal models instead of, or 
in combination with, the methods of the standardised approaches for market 
risk. Because the positions exposed to RNIME according to the process and 
requirements described in this Section 
7 are within the scope of the IMA, they 
do not need to be accounted for under the standardised approaches for market 
risk. 



Exclusions of positions from the scope of the IMA in risk categories for which 
the IMA is approved are subject to the requirements described in Section 
2.5 of 
this guide. 


175. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, institutions must have 
established procedures for monitoring and ensuring compliance with a 
documented set of internal policies and controls concerning the overall 
operation of internal models. Therefore, the ECB considers that an institution 
should have a policy and controls in place that govern the overall process for 
the identification, quantification and management of RNIME. In order to enable 
efficient monitoring of RNIME, the ECB considers that the documented policies 
should include a description of the different tasks and responsibilities, and the 
frequency of their execution. This policy and these controls constitute the 
RNIME framework. The ECB considers that the RNIME framework should cover 
the tasks described in the following paragraphs of this section. 
176. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(b) of the CRR, the risk control unit is 
responsible for the overall risk management system. Because the RNIME 
framework is an integral part of the overall IMA processes, the ECB considers 
that the risk control unit is also responsible for the overall RNIME framework. 


In accordance with Article 
368(1)(b) of the CRR, the risk control unit must 
conduct the initial and ongoing validation of any internal model for market risk. 
Therefore, the ECB considers that the RNIME framework and methodologies 
should be initially and periodically validated internally, and updated if necessary. 


7.3 Identification of RNIME 


177. A single RNIME identified refers to a distinct risk not accurately captured or 
omitted, and related to positions or instruments within the approved risk 
categories in the IMA in the VaR, sVaR, IRC or CRM models. This can refer to a 
single risk factor, a set of risk factors (e.g. 
related to a yield curve), a particular 
effect (e.g. 
volatility skew) or specific instruments. 
(a) Differences in the positions, risk factors and pricing methods captured in 
VaR, sVaR, and IRC (and CRM if applicable) engines, in comparison with 
those of the end-of-day valuation process for the books and records of an 
institution.93 In particular, these may include risk factors that are taken into 
account in the economic P&L, but not in the risk measurement model as 
referred to in Article 
367(1)(b) of the CRR. 





The ECB considers that RNIME can emerge as a result of the following 
circumstances. 


93 
Those potential RNIME are different from valuation adjustments that an institution might have made in 
order to satisfy the fair value and prudent valuation requirements under Article 
105 of the CRR. 


Some examples could be: simplified pricing models or sensitivities based 
P&L in the risk engines; use of proxies for risk factors; calibration of pricing 


(b) Weaknesses and limitations in the stochastic modelling of risk factors in 
the risk engines that are not linked to the valuation produced by the end-
of-day valuation process. 
(c) Other factors leading to risks not being captured accurately or being 
omitted from the risk engines. 





models in the risk engines; and risks not adequately modelled, such as 
basis risk between two different classes of shares. 


Some examples could be: distributional assumptions for risk factors of 
both the marginal distributions and joint distributions (i.e. 
correlation 
structure); jump risks; calibration of model parameters; regression 
approach calibration and deviations; IRC factor model assumptions and 
calibration; and insufficient or unreliable data for risk factors. 


Some examples could be: instruments on exotic underlyings in the IMA 
scope that may be treated under the RNIME framework in the manner 
referred to in paragraph 
26 of this chapter; positions in defaulted debt, as 
referred to in paragraph 
34 of this chapter; some risks not accurately 
captured due to position data not being updated daily. 


178. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, an institution must have 
established procedures for monitoring and ensuring compliance with a 
documented set of internal policies and controls concerning the overall 
operation of its internal models. Therefore, the ECB considers that in order to 
ensure a comprehensive coverage of such risks, the institution should clearly 
describe and document each RNIME in an inventory, as part of its RNIME 
framework. 


In order to properly monitor each RNIME, the ECB considers that institutions 
should explain how each RNIME is identified and defined, and should, in 
particular, be able to justify the cases where a single RNIME is defined across 
portfolios or product classes. In order to properly assess materiality, the ECB 
understands that the current portfolio composition and trading strategy of the 
institution should be taken into account when assessing each RNIME. The ECB 
understands that, generally, all RNIME need to be included in the RNIME 
framework described below. It understands that the only exception is where the 
institution can demonstrate that the effect of an identified RNIME is negligible in 
the current portfolio and will remain negligible taking into account the trading 
strategy, in which case the institution might exclude that RNIME from the 
RNIME quantification and management processes that are part of the RNIME 
framework. The institution should be able to provide justification as to why any 
particular RNIME is not included in its risk engines. 


179. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model must 
capture accurately all material price risks. The ECB considers that in order to 
ensure an accurate capture of risks, institutions should not rely solely on the 
monitoring of current RNIME, but strive to identify RNIME on an ongoing basis, 



and as early as possible, as part of the overall risk management. The ECB 
considers it best practice to use existing processes efficiently to identify RNIME. 
(a) a review of the institution’s trading strategy, as referred to in Article 
103(2) 
of the CRR, considering, in particular, the expansion and reorientation of 
the trading business, given that expanding a particular business could lead 
to RNIME becoming significant, or to additional risks that are not currently 
covered in the RNIME process; 
(b) the regulatory back-testing process, as referred to in Article 
366 of the 
CRR, as part of which the institution should review the results and 
analyses of overshootings in order to identify RNIME; 
(c) market data quality assurance processes for risk factors, as referred to in 
Article 
367(2)(e) of the CRR, where market data display insufficient quality; 
(d) initial and ongoing internal validation of internal models, as referred to in 
Articles 
368(1)(b) and 369(1) of the CRR, at least where differences 
between the institution's pricing model and risk measurement model are 
identified (for example, risk factors that are used for the valuation of a 
product for the end-of-day valuation process, but not for risk 
measurement), and where internal back-testing shows a high number of 
overshootings; 
(e) introduction of new products, where the institution should analyse whether 
the market risks inherent in the new products and their related trading 
strategies can be adequately captured by the risk engines in order to 
ensure that these new products 
– which may pose additional risk factors or 
require methodological changes 
– are fully compatible with the 
comprehensive risk control and validation by the risk control unit, as 
required by Article 
368(1)(b) of the CRR. 





As part of such best practice, and in order to maximise efficiency, institutions 
should, at a minimum, use the following processes to identify RNIME: 


In accordance with Article 
368(2)(d) of the CRR, the annual review of an 
institution’s overall risk management process must consider the scope of risks 
captured by the risk measurement model. Therefore, the ECB considers that a 
review of the inventory of RNIME should be carried out at least once a year. 


7.4 Quantification of RNIME 


180. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model used to 
calculate capital requirements for market risk must capture accurately all 
material price risks. In order to ensure a meaningful quantification of RNIME in 
relation to the internal models, the ECB considers that the risk parameters for 
RNIME quantification should be aligned to the regulatory specifications. 
Therefore, the quantification of risks-not-in-the-VaR engine should aim to reflect 



a loss at a 99% confidence level and a holding period of ten days. Similarly, the 
quantification of risks-not-in-the-sVaR engine should aim to reflect a loss at a 
99% confidence level and a holding period of ten days, and be calibrated to 
historical data from the stressed period used to calibrate the sVaR model. The 
quantification of risks-not-in-the-IRC engine (or CRM engine, if applicable) 
should aim to reflect a loss at a 99.9% confidence interval over a time horizon 
of one year. 
181. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model used to 
calculate capital requirements for market risk must capture accurately all 
material price risks. Therefore, the ECB considers that in order to ensure that 
the internal models capture all material price risks, institutions should quantify 
RNIME in an appropriate way and document and duly justify the methodology 
applied. The ECB understands that the quantification of the impact of the 
identified i-th RNIME (denoted by RNIME𝑖) serves to assess the need to 
incorporate the i-th RNIME into the engine. 


The ECB considers it best practice that for each RNIME𝑖 identified, the impact 
quantification 𝑀𝑖 should be estimated as the incremental risk number94 where 
RNIME𝑖 would be incorporated into the model engine; this is in comparison with 
the current engine using the same portfolio as reference, 
𝑀𝑖≝risk number(engine with RNIME𝑖 incorporated)
−risk number(current engine), 
risk number ∈ {VaR, sVaR, IRC, CRM} 


94 
See footnote 
85 above for details. 


where no RNIME add-ons (or other add-ons) are included in the risk numbers. 


The impact quantification 𝑀𝑖 is a signed number and could be negative if 
incorporating RNIME𝑖 were to be risk-reducing. 


The estimation of 𝑀𝑖 should be as accurate as possible using reasonable 
effort. Therefore, the ECB understands that the 𝑀𝑖 estimation methodology can 
use appropriate approximations, assumptions, or a stress methodology when 
duly justified and documented. 


Because the impact quantification should allow the different RNIME to be 
assessed individually, no diversification effect should be applied between 
different RNIME when quantifying the individual RNIME. 


182. The ECB considers that a more conservative impact quantification than 
described in paragraph 
181 could be used where this is duly justified. In 
particular, where an appropriate impact quantification using an incremental risk 
number cannot be performed, the ECB considers it a prudent approach to 
resort to a stand-alone impact estimation for RNIME𝑖, 


𝑀̃
𝑖≝risk number(RNIME𝑖 as only source of risk), 
risk number ∈ {VaR, sVaR, IRC, CRM}, 



and 𝑀𝑖 is set to 𝑀̃
𝑖 for the impact quantification. 


The estimation of 𝑀̃
𝑖 should be as accurate as possible using reasonable 
effort. Therefore, the ECB understands that the 𝑀̃
𝑖 estimation methodology can 
use appropriate approximations, assumptions, or a stress methodology when 
duly justified and documented. 


As an illustration, in the case of the VaR, and where RNIME𝑖 can be well 
described as a sensitivity 𝑝𝑖 to an additional risk factor (i.e. 
a risk position), the 
impact quantification 𝑀𝑖 corresponds to its incremental VaR, i.e. 
the 
incremental effect on VaR of adding the risk position 𝑝𝑖 to the existing set of 
risk positions. Let 𝑝 denote the set of current risk positions, and let VaR(𝑝) 
denote the current VaR, then the impact quantification 𝑀𝑖 of RNIME𝑖 
interpreted as an additional risk position 𝑝𝑖 is 
𝑀𝑖=VaR(𝑝+𝑝𝑖)−VaR(𝑝) 


The impact quantification as incremental risk, M𝑖, is different from the 
assessment of the risk on a stand-alone basis as a sole source of risk, 𝑀̃
𝑖. In 
the setting above, the stand-alone risk would be 𝑀̃
𝑖=VaR(𝑝𝑖), which in general 
is different from VaR(𝑝+𝑝𝑖)−VaR(𝑝). If the sub-additivity property VaR(𝑝)+
VaR(𝑝𝑖)≥VaR(𝑝+𝑝𝑖) holds, the stand-alone risk VaR(𝑝𝑖) is a conservative 
estimate of the incremental risk, 
𝑀̃
𝑖=VaR(𝑝𝑖)≡VaR(𝑝)+VaR(𝑝𝑖)−VaR(𝑝)≥VaR(𝑝+𝑝𝑖)−VaR(𝑝)=𝑀𝑖. 


Because VaR, sVaR, IRC and CRM are all value-at-risk-based risk measures, 
the same applies for those, by analogy. 


183. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model used to 
calculate capital requirements for market risk must capture accurately all 
material price risks. The ECB considers that in order to ensure that the 
quantification of RNIME is appropriately accurate, the quantification should, 
where possible, make use of objective market data, even if the data quality is 
not sufficient to model these risks in the model engine. 


In order to ensure alignment with the internal models when quantifying an 
RNIME – for example, by using sensitivities – the shocks applied in order to 
quantify it should be based on the same holding period and, in principle, on the 
same observation period as those for the shocks for the other risk factors used 
in the relevant internal model. Differences in the observation period should be 
duly justified. If scarce data are used to calibrate these shocks, the shocks 
should be estimated conservatively. This may involve relying to some extent on 
expert judgement. 



7.5 Management of RNIME and implementation in an institution’s risk 
engines 


184. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model must 
capture accurately all material price risks. The ECB considers that in order to 
ensure ongoing accurate risk capture, the risk control unit should carry out 
regular impact quantification and monitoring of all RNIME. 


If an institution can provide justification that an impact quantification of a VaR 
RNIME also applies for sVaR, the sVaR impact quantification and monitoring 
may be based on the VaR impact quantification. If it cannot provide such 
justification, or where certain RNIME have been identified specifically for the 
sVaR engine, a specific impact quantification and monitoring for those sVaR 
RNIME should be performed. Monitoring of RNIME should include, in particular, 
checking whether RNIME are above certain thresholds, as further detailed 
below in this Section 
7.5. 


185. In accordance with Article 
430(1) of the CRR in conjunction with Article 
5(a) of 
the Commission Implementing Regulation on supervisory reporting, institutions 
must submit the information relating to own funds requirements with a quarterly 
frequency. Therefore, the ECB considers that in order to assess the adequacy 
of own funds, institutions should quantify and monitor the RNIME at least 
quarterly. 


The risk control unit should report the outcome of the quantification and 
monitoring to the committee or persons responsible for deciding on the 
management of RNIME in terms of identification, quantification, treatment, 
limitation, reporting frequency, etc. 


186. In accordance with Article 
367(1)(a) of the CRR, any internal model must 
capture accurately all material price risks. Therefore, the ECB considers that in 
order to ensure that the models accurately capture all material price risks 
including RNIME and thereby result in a sufficient level of own funds, 
institutions should take into account all of the following points. 
(a) An RNIME𝑖, where 𝑀𝑖 < 0 does not allow the reduction of own funds 
requirements until the related risk has been incorporated into the relevant 
engine. 
(b) Institutions should determine thresholds for assessing, at their own 
discretion, the impact of individual RNIME above which an individual 
RNIME is considered a “substantial” RNIME. 





The ECB considers that if a single RNIME already has a 5% impact, there 
is a risk that the risk engine might not capture accurately all material risks. 
Therefore, the ECB considers as best practice that the i-th individual 
RNIME is considered substantial if the impact quantification 𝑀𝑖 


corresponds to more than 5% of the amount computed by the risk engine95 
(without taking into account any add-ons, as they are not included in the 
relevant risk number). 


95 
The calculation should be made at the end of the quarter by comparing the impact quantification of the 
RNIME, e.g. 
at the end of the quarter, with the previous 60-business day average of the VaR or sVaR, 
or the previous 12-week average of the IRC or CRM amount (without any add-ons). 


96 
This is without prejudice to a determination by the ECB, based on an assessment taking into account 
the specific circumstances of the institution, that the model does not accurately capture all material 
price risks. 


(c) Institutions should determine, at their own discretion, thresholds above 
which RNIME are incorporated into the model engines. 


That is, RNIME𝑖 is considered substantial if 
𝑀𝑖
risk number 
>5% , risk number ∈ {VaR, sVaR, IRC, CRM} 


This is without prejudice to the discretion of an institution to set a lower 
threshold than 5%. 


The ECB considers it best practice and prudent that institutions should 
include any substantial RNIME𝑖 in their total risk exposure amount by way 
of an RNIME𝑖 add-on of size 𝑀𝑖 multiplied by 12.5, in order to calculate 
the corresponding risk exposure amount. In so doing they should take into 
account the multiplication factors (mc) and (ms) for VaR and sVaR as 
referred to in Article 
366 of the CRR without the back-testing addend, until 
they have incorporated it into the engine affected. Consistent with the 
impact quantification, the ECB considers that there should not be any 
diversification effect between different RNIME add-ons. 


In accordance with Article 
7a(1)(c)(ii) of the Commission Delegated 
Regulation on materiality of extensions and changes of the IMA, a change 
of 10% or more of a relevant risk VaR, sVaR, IRC, or CRM number is to be 
considered a material change to the IMA. Therefore, the ECB considers, 
by analogy, that if the cumulative RNIME impact corresponds to more than 
10% of the amount computed by the risk engine, this indicates that an 
engine might not capture accurately all material price risks,96 as the 
change needed to incorporate them into the engine could amount to a 
material model change. 


In order to assess whether that is the case, institutions should calculate 
the cumulative impact quantification CIQrisk number per risk number by 
adding the positive impacts of all RNIME related to that risk number, 
including those subject to an RNIME add-on, without taking any 
diversification among the different RNIME into account, and dividing by the 
risk number computed by the model engine without taking any add-ons 


into account.97 If the resulting ratio is greater than 10%, the ECB considers 
that the model engine might not accurately capture all material price risks, 
CIQrisk number=
Σmax[𝑀𝑖,0]all RNIME𝑖 related to risk numberrisk number 
> 10%, 
risk number ∈ {VaR, sVaR, IRC, CRM} 


97 
The calculation should be made at the end of the quarter by comparing the sum of impact quantification 
of the RNIME, e.g. 
at the end of the quarter, with the 60-business-day average of the VaR or sVaR, or 
the 12-week average of the IRC or CRM amount of the preceding quarter. 


(d) The ECB considers it a prudent approach that RNIME which are to be 
incorporated into the relevant engine(s) are capitalised with RNIME 
add-ons as part of the implementation plan, until they are incorporated into 
the relevant engine(s). If the institution deems it convenient, the remaining 
RNIME may also be capitalised with RNIME add-ons. 


This is without prejudice to the discretion of an institution to set a lower 
threshold than 10%. 


If it is the case that the ratio as calculated above is greater than 10% (or a 
lower threshold set by the institution), the institution should provide the 
ECB with an implementation plan for the incorporation of some or all of 
these RNIME in the model engine(s), such that the cumulative impacts are 
reduced below the threshold. 


187. With reference to the previous paragraphs in this Section 
7.5, the incorporation 
of RNIME into the model engine should be performed so that the engine 
complies with all relevant requirements of the CRR including, in particular, 
internal validation. The term “incorporation” here means the integration of 
RNIME into the relevant risk engine, and into its methodology and processes, 
typically allowing for risk diversification. This is without prejudice to the 
discretion of an institution not to use empirical correlations within risk categories 
or across risk categories, as referred to in Article 
367(3) of the CRR, by 
applying instead a simple sum aggregation. 
188. In accordance with Article 
430(1) of the CRR in conjunction with Article 
5(a) of 
the Commission Implementing Regulation on supervisory reporting, institutions 
must submit the information relating to own funds requirements with a quarterly 
frequency. Therefore, the ECB considers that in order to ensure an accurate 
quarterly reporting of own funds requirements and risk exposure amounts, the 
RNIME add-ons should be updated at least quarterly. 


In order to enable monitoring of RNIME add-ons, the ECB can, on the basis of 
Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require an institution to provide an overview 
of RNIME add-ons in a suitable format chosen by the institution. 


189. Because the RNIME framework is an integral part of the overall IMA processes, 
a change to the RNIME framework 
– in particular one that relates to the RNIME 
identification methodology, the consideration of new types of RNIME, the impact 



quantification methodology, or the RNIME add-on methodology 
– constitutes an 
IMA model change and should therefore be assessed in accordance with the 
Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality of extensions and changes of 
the IMA. 


In accordance with Article 
7b and Annex III, Part 
II, Section 
2(13) of the 
Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality of extensions and changes of 
the IMA, any structural, organisational or operational change to the core 
processes in risk management or risk controlling functions requires ex ante 
notification to the competent authorities. The ECB considers that because the 
RNIME framework is an integral part of the overall IMA processes, a change to 
the RNIME framework should accordingly be notified ex ante to the competent 
authorities. 


However, changes within the existing RNIME framework which do not need new 
methodologies or processes to be implemented should be notified to the 
competent authorities through ex post notifications only. 


190. Ceasing to capitalise an RNIME, or capitalising an RNIME with an RNIME add-
on according to the thresholds of the RNIME framework, does not constitute a 
model change and does not need to be separately notified as a model change, 
provided that it is based on the approved methodology of the RNIME 
framework. 
191. The incorporation of RNIME𝑖 into the model engine, irrespective of whether it 
was previously treated as an RNIME add-on or not, and irrespective of whether 
it is an RNIME identified previously or is newly identified, constitutes an IMA 
model change and should therefore be assessed in accordance with the 
Commission Delegated Regulation on materiality of extensions and changes of 
the IMA. The materiality assessment, in accordance with Article 
7a(1)(c)(ii) of 
that Commission Delegated Regulation, should be based on the new risk 
number, i.e. 
on the following ratio, 


risk number(engine with RNIME𝑖 incorporated)
risk number(current engine)
, 
risk number ∈ {VaR, sVaR, IRC, CRM} 


For the sum of market risk requirements, the assessment of materiality in 
accordance with Article 
7a(1)(c)(i) of that Commission Delegated Regulation 
should be made analogously. 


192. Because the RNIME add-ons are not included in the VaR number, they should 
not be taken into account when performing regulatory back-testing. However, all 
VaR engine components that constitute the VaR engine (including, where 
applicable, satellite components) should be taken into account in the regulatory 
back-testing.



Counterparty credit risk 


1 Scope of the counterparty credit risk chapter 


1. The purpose of this chapter is to provide transparency on how the ECB 
understands a number of topics related to the principles defined for the Internal 
Model Method (IMM1, as referred to in Part 
Three, Title 
II, Chapter 
6, Section 
6 
of the CRR). This chapter does not contain an exhaustive list of topics relevant 
for compliance with IMM requirements that could be subject to review during 
future internal model investigations.2 
2. In the understanding of the ECB and in order to comply with Article 
6(1) of the 
CRR, all requirements of Part 
III Title 
2 Chapter 
6 Section 
6 must also be met 
by all legal entities that have approval to use the IMM for solo capital 
requirement calculations. This is especially important when underlying portfolios 
differ and the portfolio at consolidated level is not representative of that at the 
solo level. In particular, these requirements are relevant for stress period 
determination in accordance with Article 
292(3) of the CRR and for all validation 
requirements when selecting, for example, relevant risk factors and synthetic 
portfolios for back-testing. 
3. The following sections are structured in the same manner and cover those 
issues relating to counterparty credit risk (CCR) for which the TRIM project was 
intended to ensure the consistent application of regulatory requirements. For 
each item the following apply. 
(a) References are only made to the relevant CRR provisions that require 
more guidance. Other relevant provisions of the CRR are therefore not 
mentioned in the guide, but are not to be disregarded; this refers 
specifically to paragraphs 
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 86, 0 and 0. 
(b) Principles are expressed following CRR requirements as they are 
understood by the ECB. 





1 
Note that the advanced method for the CVA capital requirement is not in scope here. 


2 
A prominent example is data quality. 


2 Trade coverage 


4. For the purposes of this section, “IMM transactions” are transactions for which 
the institution has approval to use the IMM to estimate the related exposure 
value. 



5. This section refers to transactions for which the institution does not have 
approval to use the IMM, and IMM transactions, for which the related exposure 
is not fully simulated in the IMM.3 
6. The section also addresses potential carve-outs of transactions from the IMM 
scope to a non-IMM method, for example due to price differences compared 
with benchmarking systems4, and the consequences of the potential creation of 
synthetic netting sets. 


3 
“Fully simulated” in this context means that, for each of the simulated market data paths with a joint 
dependency structure at the pre-defined grid points, a full revaluation of the transactions is performed. 
All material risk drivers of the valuation routine are simulated, and the pricing function is not 
approximated compared with the benchmarking system. 


4 
See the definition in the 


Counterparty credit risk glossary. 


2.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 32 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

273 

(6) 

283 

(1), (3) 

284 

(1) 

293 

(4) 

294 

(1)(d), (l), (o) 

Other references 

 

 

 

ECB Guide on options and discretions 
available in Union law 

11/2016 

Section II, Chapter 3, paragraph 8 



 


7. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following. 
(a) Articles 
283(1) (permission to use the IMM) and 283(3) (sequential 
implementation of the IMM) of the CRR, further specified for banking 
supervision in Section 
II, Chapter 
3, paragraph 
8 of the ECB Guide on 
options and discretions available in Union law, form the basis for IMM 
approval. 
(b) Article 
273(6) of the CRR requires, for all methods in Part 
Three, Title 
II, 
Chapter 
6, Sections 
3 to 6 of the CRR (Articles 
274 to 294), that the 
exposure value for a given counterparty is calculated as the sum of 
exposure values, calculated for each netting set with that counterparty. 
However, these provisions do not explicitly address the case of synthetic 
netting sets arising from the splitting of a contractual netting set. 






(c) Article 
294(1)(d) of the CRR requires that actions be taken to address the 
inaccuracy of the model if model validation indicates that the effective 
expected positive exposure (EEPE) is underestimated. 
(d) Article 
294(1)(l) of the CRR requires that pricing functions be tested 
against an appropriate independent benchmark. 
(e) Article 
294(1)(o) of the CRR requires, in a general way and without further 
explanation, that validation “shall assess whether or not the counterparty 
level and netting set exposure calculations … are appropriate”. 
(f) According to Article 
293(4) of the CRR, any “institution shall define criteria 
with which to assess its CCR exposure models and the models that input 
into the calculation of exposure and maintain a written policy that 
describes the process by which unacceptable performance will be 
identified and remedied”. However, this provision is drafted in a general 
way and needs to be detailed further. 
(g) Article 
284(1) of the CRR requires that the exposure value at netting set 
level be calculated for those transactions where the institution has the 
permission to use the IMM in accordance with Article 
283(1) of the CRR. 
(h) Article 
284(1)(a) of the CRR provides that the model used by the institution 
must “specify the forecasting distribution for changes in the market value 
of the netting set attributable to joint changes in relevant market variables, 
such as interest rates, foreign exchange rates”. 
(i) Article 
284(1)(b) of the CRR provides that the model used by the institution 
must “calculate the exposure value for the netting set at each of the future 
dates on the basis of the joint changes in the market variables”. It is not 
specific about excluding any exposure simulation for some transactions 
outside the standard joint Monte Carlo simulations. 





8. The CRR does not explicitly establish a requirement regarding how to handle 
netting sets in cases where transactions which the institution has general 
approval to treat with the IMM need to be carved out from the IMM to a non-
IMM method for any reason. 


2.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


9. With regard to the coverage of the IMM, institutions should comply with 
Section 
II, Chapter 
3, paragraph 
8 of the ECB Guide on options and discretions 
available in Union law, where the IMM coverage mentioned covers transactions 
treated under the method described in Part 
Three, Title 
II, Chapter 
6, Section 
6 
of the CRR. Transactions treated under any non-IMM method are, however, 
excluded. In particular, transactions which are carved out from the IMM are 
excluded from the IMM coverage. 



10. For cases where, for a given legally enforceable netting agreement as defined 
in Part 
Three, Title 
II, Chapter 
6, Section 
7 of the CRR, one part of the 
transactions is treated under the method described in Section 
6 (IMM) and 
another part is covered by one of the non-IMM methods5, the ECB considers, 
as a best practice, the creation of different synthetic netting sets, one per 
method. Hence, one synthetic netting set covers all the transactions under the 
IMM, and the other synthetic netting sets cover all the transactions under each 
non-IMM method (one per non-IMM method). 
11. It is the ECB’s understanding that synthetic netting sets created for the 
purposes described in paragraph 
10 should cover only transactions under the 
same contractual netting agreement; that is, Article 
273(6) of the CRR (netting 
set-specific application of any CCR method) is understood to apply also to 
synthetic netting sets. 
12. In relation to the requirement provided for by Article 
294(1)(l) of the CRR6 and 
in accordance with Article 
294(1)(d) of the CRR, it is the ECB’s understanding 
that institutions should implement a framework that enables them to identify 
significant pricing model deficiencies at transaction level. It is seen as good 
practice to apply at least the following filter criteria to ensure the consistent 
identification of such deficiencies (in accordance with Article 
294(1)(o) of the 
CRR) when comparing the IMM transaction’s 𝑡0 value and the respective 
benchmark value: 
(a) a threshold based on the absolute price difference; 
(b) a threshold for differences expressed as a percentage of the notional 
amount; 
(c) a threshold for differences expressed as a percentage of the absolute 
value of the respective benchmark. 





5 
This implies that not all transactions covered by the contractual netting agreement are treated under 
the IMM. 


6 
See paragraph 
81 with regard to how to detect value differences of transactions between the IMM and 
the benchmarking system. 


The institution should be able to justify the setting of the above filter criteria, 
which should be regularly validated and defined so that unacceptable model 
performance as set out in Article 
293(4) of the CRR can be assessed, 
especially for pricing. 


13. The ECB considers that appropriate measures to address identified model 
weaknesses as referred to in the above assessment are as follows. 
(a) A carve-out of transactions to one of the non-IMM methods, together with 
the creation of synthetic netting sets to remedy unacceptable performance 
of the CCR exposure model in accordance with Article 
293(4) in 
conjunction with Article 
294(1)(d) of the CRR. This is proposed provided 
that one of the identified price differences referred to in paragraph 
12 is 
observed for longer than the number of business days that is pre-defined 






by the institution for this case. The ECB sees it as good practice that this 
number is limited to ten business days during the reference quarter. 
(b) Measures other than carve-outs and the creation of synthetic netting sets 
that could be applied to address model deficiencies, provided that these 
other measures (i) can be justified, (ii) are regularly validated, and (iii) 
meet the purpose set out in Article 
294(1)(d) of the CRR of not 
systematically underestimating exposure, in conjunction with the purpose 
of Article 
293(4) of the CRR of identifying and remedying unacceptable 
exposure model performance. 





This includes, in the ECB’s understanding as further explained in paragraph 
81, 
that institutions should take all necessary remediation actions to solve the root 
causes creating the most significant differences between the values of pricing 
functions used for revaluation under the IMM and the respective benchmarking 
value in a timely manner. 


14. For all transactions that have been identified according to the assessment 
described in paragraph 
12 and that remain in the IMM because they have not 
been carved out to address identified model weaknesses in accordance with 
paragraph 
13(a), it is the ECB’s understanding that the differences between the 
𝑡0 transaction values and the benchmarks as referred to in Article 
294(1)(l) of 
the CRR should be taken into account. For such transactions, the ECB regards 
the following corrections as appropriate measures to remedy weaknesses in the 
exposure calculation as a result of pricing model deficiencies in accordance 
with Article 
293(4) of the CRR. 
(a) At 𝑡0, IMM transaction values are adjusted to match the respective 
benchmark value. 
(b) At future grid points, an adjustment to the modelling of the transaction’s 
future values is applied in such a way that the EEPE of the netting set after 
correction is not lower than that without any correction. Rather than using 
the observed difference at 𝑡0, the correction could be estimated using 
more sophisticated methods, taking future market scenarios and 
amortising transactions into account. 





The corrections should be regularly validated (see paragraph 
81(b)). 


15. The ECB may see it as a violation of Article 
292(1) CRR if the price differences 
as identified in accordance with paragraph 
12 (i) are persistent, (ii) do not lead 
to remediation of model deficiencies and (iii) lead to a systematic 
underestimation of exposure, In such cases, the ECB may consider supervisory 
measures regarding affected transaction types. 
16. In the ECB’s understanding, transactions carved out as a result, for example, of 
price differences with a benchmarking system should not be considered as 
contributing to the required IMM coverage explained in Section 
II, Chapter 
3, 
paragraph 
8 of the ECB Guide on options and discretions available in Union 
law. 



17. The ECB considers it best practice to perform a full simulation in accordance 
with paragraph 
5 for all IMM transactions to directly comply with the 
requirements of Article 
284(1) of the CRR. In cases where this practice is not 
feasible, the ECB considers that the following approach would still be compliant 
with the CRR: 
(a) if other (approximate) pricing methods are used, they should be subject to 
the validation requirements described in paragraphs 
81 and 83(a) to 83(c); 
(b) if any alternative way to calculate exposures7 is used, then the following 
points should be taken into account along with the validation requirements 
described in paragraphs 
81 and 83(d). 
(i) The institution should be able to demonstrate that the sole reason for 
using this exposure calculation method is pricing performance, or a 
performance issue related to calibrating certain transaction-specific 
risk factors. For example, including these transactions in a full 
simulation in accordance with paragraph 
5 would delay regulatory 
reporting by more than one business day. 
(ii) Correlations with the other risk factors simulated in the CCR 
exposure model should be taken into account when calculating or 
calibrating such exposures. This would also hold in the case of new 
or aggregated risk factors only used for this exposure calculation 
method. 
(iii) The underlying risk factor simulation should account for the exposure 
time dependency, in particular for margined trading regarding the time 
grid point to which the margin period of risk (MPOR) is attached. 
(iv) This exposure calculation method should account for potential trade-
related cash flows (CFs) during the MPOR, either directly or in such a 
way as to avoid systematic underestimation of the exposure. 
(v) Pricing functions used for the purpose of calculating or calibrating the 
current exposure of affected transactions should be an explicit part of 
the IMM framework and governance. 
(vi) The sum of the absolute 𝑡0 values of these transactions is below 
20%8 of the total sum of absolute 𝑡0 values from all transactions 
covered by the IMM. 








7 
Examples could be scenario-independent, pre-defined time profiles per transaction starting at the 𝑡0 
value, or scenario-independent, pre-defined value increases per transaction during MPOR, or new risk 
factors aggregated from those used in Article 
284(1)(a) of the CRR with an own stochastic process. 


8 
This percentage may decrease in the future. 



3 Margin period of risk and cash flows 


18. This section refers to the modelling of the MPOR,9 including the following 
aspects. 
(a) Treatment of margin call and trade-related CFs in all currencies. The 
trade-related CFs include here both intermediary flows and the settlements 
at maturity related to trades, as well as flows in the form of a commodity or 
precious metal or any other asset that may be paid/received during the 
MPOR. Trade-related CFs paid by the institution to the counterparty result 
in upward jumps of the exposure time profile (hereinafter called “spikes”). 
(b) Taking the default management process (DMP) into account when 
modelling CFs paid/received during the MPOR. The DMP refers to all legal 
and operational actions performed by the institution upon counterparty 
default before the institution stops paying margin call and trade-related 
CFs to the defaulted counterparty. 
(c) Interpolation techniques that may be applied to estimate the netting set 
market value at MPOR time points that do not belong to the simulation 
time grid used. 
(d) Mapping between each time grid point t, for which EE(t) is calculated, and 
the associated MPOR.10 
(e) Clarifying the term “most recent exchange of collateral” regarding the 
definition of the MPOR and thus specifying the point in time in the 
modelling when the MPOR starts. 
(f) The concepts of “illiquid collateral”, over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives and 
collateral that “cannot be easily replaced” under “stressed market 
conditions” and “concentration” of transactions or securities in a particular 
counterparty. 





9 
Note that the modelling of collateral is addressed in Section 
4. 


10 
Due to the small distance between the adjacent grid points (t), MPORs related to the two adjacent grid 
points may overlap. 



3.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 33 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

272 

(9) 

284 

(1), (4) 

285 

(2), (3), (4), (5) 

289 

(5) 

292 

(1)(a), (b) 

294 

(1)(g), (i) 



 


19. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following. 
(a) Article 
292(1)(a) of the CRR, which requires the model to reflect 
transaction terms and specifications in a timely, complete and conservative 
fashion, but does not make explicit mention of trade-related CFs. 
(b) Article 
292(1)(b) of the CRR, which requires that netting agreements 
(including actions upon counterparty default or outstanding payments of 
the counterparty as part of netting arrangements) be reflected. 
(c) Article 
289(5) of the CRR, which notably provides that an “institution shall 
estimate EE along a time profile of forecasting horizons that adequately 
reflects the time structure of future CFs and maturity of the contracts and 
in a manner that is consistent with the materiality and composition of the 
exposures”. However, modelling within the MPOR is not explicitly 
mentioned. 
(d) Article 
272(9) of the CRR, which provides a definition of the MPOR: 
“‘margin period of risk’ means the time period from the most recent 
exchange of collateral covering a netting set of transactions with a 
defaulting counterparty until the transactions are closed out and the 
resulting market risk is re-hedged”. However, this definition does not 
mention the trade-related CFs. Furthermore, it is not explicitly stated 
whether the most recent exchange of collateral refers to the time when the 
margin amount is called or the time of the final settlement after the 
collateral is received. 
(e) Article 
284(4) of the CRR, which specifies how to use the alpha parameter, 
mentioning that competent authorities may require a higher one than 1.4. 
(f) Article 
294(1)(g) of the CRR, which notably requires the validation of 
transaction-specific information to capture the effects of margining in the 
model, and Article 
294(1)(i) of the CRR, which requires the testing of key 
assumptions of the CCR exposure model, without mentioning explicitly 
advanced features in MPOR and CF modelling, such as the use of 






“Brownian Bridge”-based interpolation for additional time grid points in the 
MPOR. 
(g) According to Article 
284(1) of the CRR, the exposure value needs to be 
calculated “on the basis of joint changes in relevant market variables”. It 
does not give explicit details regarding the starting point in time of these 
changes. 
(h) Article 
285(2) to (5) of the CRR sets the length of the MPOR. There is no 
special provision for its length if the MPOR is attached to (i) time grid 
points 𝑡 after 𝑡0 but before 𝑡0 plus the MPOR length or (ii) time grid 
points at the end of the exposure time axis with 𝑡 plus MPOR being later 
than the one-year horizon or later than the final maturity of the netting set. 
(i) According to Article 
284(4) of the CRR, the “model shall estimate EE at a 
series of future dates t1, t2, t3, etc.” The article does not specify for 
margined trading in which way an MPOR needs to be attached to these 
future dates, in particular concerning attachments close to 𝑡0 and close to 
the one-year future date or the final maturity of the netting set. 
(j) Article 
285(3) of the CRR provides for two exceptions for the calculation of 
the MPOR for transactions subject to daily re-margining and mark-to-
market valuation, namely (i) if the number of trades exceeds 5,000 at any 
point during a quarter, or (ii) if a netting set contains one or more trades 
involving either illiquid collateral or an OTC derivative that cannot be easily 
replaced. In these two cases, the MPOR must not be less than 20 
business days. The provision provides for the following two obligations in 
this context. 
(i) Institutions must determine whether collateral is illiquid or whether 
OTC derivatives cannot be easily replaced in the context of stressed 
market conditions, characterised by the absence of continuously 
active markets where a counterparty would, within two days or fewer, 
obtain multiple price quotations that would, however, not move the 
market or represent a price reflecting a market discount for collateral 
or a premium for OTC derivatives. 
(ii) Institutions must also consider whether trades or securities it holds as 
collateral are concentrated in a particular counterparty and, if that 
counterparty exited the market precipitously, whether the institution 
would be able to replace those trades or securities. 








3.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


20. The requirements of Articles 
292(1)(a) and 289(5) of the CRR are also seen as 
being applicable to the modelling of exposure changes of margined trading 
within the MPOR. The term “margin arrangement”, as mentioned in 
Article 
292(1)(b) of the CRR, is understood as comprising all contractual 



features, the margining mechanism with margin call triggers, grace periods and 
close-out provisions, which, according to Article 
292(1)(a) of the CRR, must be 
reflected in the model. 
(a) In the view of the ECB, with regard to the modelling of margin call and 
trade-related CFs within the MPOR, Article 
272(9) of the CRR should be 
understood as requiring that none of these CFs be received from the 
counterparty after the beginning of the MPOR. An institution may receive 
trade-related CFs after the beginning of the MPOR only if it can justify that 
its assumptions are consistent with its modelling of default time within the 
MPOR, its DMP and its assumptions regarding non-payment of CFs.11 
(b) Furthermore, the counterparty is supposed to default at some time point 
during the MPOR, and non-payment of trade-related CFs to the defaulting 
counterparty may be assumed to the extent that this assumption is 
consistent with: 
(i) the DMP and the features of enforceable settlement mechanisms 
(e.g. 
agreements to net CFs with related margin calls or analogues to 
the Continuous Linked Settlement system); 
(ii) the grace period and close-out requirements specified in the netting 
agreement, and in particular how the close-out is affected by paid or 
non-paid CFs. 








11 
At the very least, while CFs are still modelled to be received from the counterparty, it should be 
assumed that CFs are also paid to the counterparty. 


(c) If the institution has no defined DMP or the DMP is not taken into account 
in the modelling, all trade-related CFs due by the institution should be 
assumed to be paid to the counterparty during the whole MPOR. 
(d) Assuming that there are documented and enforceable settlement netting 
rules, the aggregation of netting set CFs with opposite signs falling due on 
the same date from different legs of the same transactions and/or from 
other transactions in the netting set could be integrated into the modelling 
of CFs within the MPOR. The resulting net CF should be treated in 
accordance with points 20(a) and 20(b). 
(e) A modelling different from the expected modelling described above 
showing discrepancies with the DMP could be accepted if it is shown that 
the quantitative impact of this approach on the EEPE is not material. 


It is seen as good practice and cautious modelling (for example, given that 
watchlists of critical counterparties include only a subset of all potentially 
critical counterparties) that trade-related CFs from the institution to the 
counterparty that are due according to the underlying contract are 
assumed to be paid at least for a time period after the beginning of the 
MPOR corresponding to the re-margining period. 



21. If (i) an institution does not comply with the requirements of Articles 
292(1)(a) 
and 289(5) of the CRR as explained in sub-paragraphs 
20(a)-20(d) above and 
(ii) there is a material impact as referred to in sub-paragraph 
20(e), the ECB 
has the power to impose an appropriate and proportionate supervisory 
remediation measure, which can consist – as provided for by Article 
284(4) of 
the CRR – in an increase of the alpha parameter. 
22. MPOR modelling may require the estimation of netting set market values at 
time points that do not belong to the simulation time grid. It is the ECB’s 
understanding of Article 
294(1)(g) of the CRR that interpolation/extrapolation 
techniques12 used by institutions to perform such estimations should be 
validated by studies showing that impacts on the EEPE, compared with full 
revaluation, are not material. 
23. In the view of the ECB, backward13 and forward14 modelling of the MPOR 
setting, as well as a mix of both15, can be considered CRR-compliant. In 
particular the following holds. 
(a) Backward modelling approach: 
For time grid points t falling within the interval [𝑡0,𝑡0+𝑀𝑃𝑂𝑅], institutions 
should calculate expected exposure 𝐸𝐸(𝑡)) as required in Article 
284(4) of 
the CRR by modelling joint changes in relevant market variables 
mentioned in Article 
284(1)(b) of the CRR starting from 𝑡0, since 
Article 
284(5) of the CRR defines this date as the earliest date for the 
calculation of exposure. 
(b) Forward modelling approach: 
When using the forward modelling approach, institutions should calculate 
expected exposure 𝐸𝐸(𝑡)) as required by Article 
284(4) of the CRR by 
taking into account close-out amounts that are determined after 𝑡 within 
the MPOR period as given by Article 
285(2) to (5) of the CRR. This also 
applies when 𝑡∈[1𝑦−𝑀𝑃𝑂𝑅,1𝑦], i.e. 
for such a 𝑡, 𝑡+𝑀𝑃𝑂𝑅≥1𝑦 
holds. 
Furthermore, if 𝑡 equals the maturity (𝑇), of the longest-lasting transaction 
in the netting set, and if no collateral is modelled as held by the institution 
at 𝑇 for a given scenario, the effective length of the MPOR may shorten, 
as no close-out or re-hedging is due after maturity of the last transaction in 
the netting set. 





12 
For example, a Brownian Bridge-based interpolation. 


13 
In backward modelling, 𝐸𝐸(𝑡) is calculated on the basis of the evolution of exposure (as a result of the 
evolution of transaction and collateral values) in the time interval [𝑡−𝑀𝑃𝑂𝑅,𝑡], where MPOR denotes 
the time length of the MPOR. 


14 
In forward modelling, 𝐸𝐸(𝑡) is calculated on the basis of the evolution of exposure in the time interval 
[𝑡,𝑡+𝑀𝑃𝑂𝑅]. In this approach, the MPOR starts at t and ends at 𝑡+𝑀𝑃𝑂𝑅. 


15 
This includes variants of attaching the MPOR to the 𝑡 of 𝐸𝐸(𝑡), where the 𝑡 is not at the border of the 
time interval set by the MPOR. 



The ECB understands that the effective length of the MPOR for these grid 
points may be shortened and considers that this will not affect the formal length 
of the MPOR as provided for by Article 
285(2) to (5) of the CRR. 


24. In the view of the ECB, the term “exchange of collateral” in Article 
272(9) of the 
CRR means that the exchange process has been initiated and has a high 
probability of being completed, or is expected to be completed, even if the 
collateral called actually arrives only after the start of the MPOR. This 
understanding implies that the default time is not necessarily immediately at the 
start of the MPOR but could occur at a later point in time. For modelling 
purposes, it may still be assumed that collateral will be delivered for margin 
calls issued at the time the MPOR starts or earlier. Furthermore, this 
understanding implies that changes in value that arise after a margin call is 
issued and that affect both collateral and underlying transactions in the 
collateral agreement can happen within the full MPOR. 
25. Where a netting set contains one or more trades involving either illiquid 
collateral or an OTC derivative that cannot be easily replaced, the ECB 
considers that the correct application of Article 
285(3)(b) of the CRR should 
imply that the following items are defined and determined by each institution 
based on its portfolio and market data history: 
(a) illiquid collateral, which includes the collateral legs of securities financing 
transactions (SFTs); 
(b) OTC derivatives that cannot be easily replaced (hereinafter referred to as 
“hard-to-replace transactions”); 
(c) trades or securities that are held as collateral, concentrated in a particular 
counterparty; 
(d) stressed market conditions. 





This means that institutions should implement processes to reliably identify the 
securities or transactions concerned and the related netting sets, and to monitor 
them. 


26. In establishing the definitions of the items mentioned in paragraph 
25(a) to (c) 
above, along with the related processes, the ECB sees it as good practice if an 
institution considers, for each counterparty, the following features and attributes 
of transactions and collateral: 
(a) For illiquid collateral and hard-to-replace transactions: 
(i) product type, underlying asset(s) and complexity (e.g. path-
dependent features, payoffs in different currencies or multiple 
underlyings, etc.)16; 








16 
The ECB suggests that, when assessing complexity, institutions take into consideration the Final draft 
RTS on assessment methodology for IMA and significant share, in particular Article 
7. 



(ii) accounting classification17; 
(iii) clearing18; 
(iv) currency; 
(v) size/notional amount; 
(vi) time-to-maturity; 
(vii) issuer concentration19; 
(viii) frequency and depth of marking/market price observations; 
(ix) type(s)20 of underlying21; 
(x) liquidation cost.22 
(b) For illiquid collateral in addition to point (a) above: 
(i) security type and categorisation as a “liquid asset” under Article 
416 
of the CRR; 
(ii) time period (number of business days) since the most recent market 
price23 was observed; 
(iii) issuer’s financial health (based, for instance, on its external rating 
and recent public information). 



(c) For the concentration of transactions or of collateral in one counterparty: 
(i) for derivative transactions, the sensitivity to main risk factors (as 
defined by the institution), or the notional amount or mark-to-market 
value, whichever is more appropriate for the type of transaction; 
(ii) for a security that is part of an SFT or received variation margin, the 
notional amount or mark-to-market value of the security posted to the 
institution should be compared with the same security’s trading 
volume in the market; 





17 
The concept of “fair value hierarchy” in IFRS 
13 may be one useful input for institutions’ definitions. 


18 
For example, a transaction that is offered for central clearing and is therefore more standardised could 
be more liquid or easier to replace under stressed market conditions, even if the particular OTC 
derivative itself is not cleared but could be cleared because the institution has access to a CCP that 
offers the clearing possibility. 


19 
Concentration relative to the market in which the institution trades, taking into account, for example, 
single equity stocks and bonds that have a significant share relative to the overall market capitalisation 
or issued volumes. 


20 
For example, a basket of (different) securities in the collateral leg of an SFT or components of an index. 


21 
Liquidity may be different for an option on a highly traded equity share (that is part of an index) than for 
a thinly traded equity share. 


22 
For example, a ratio as a risk metric divided by the average daily traded volume. 


23 
The term “market price” refers to the price of an executed security transaction or a binding quote. 



(iii) items (i) and (ii) should also take into account cases where the 
concentrated transaction or collateral might be hard to replace or 
illiquid under stressed market conditions. 
(a) analyse the available market data history on a regular basis in order to 
identify historical events leading to conditions where the market for a 
certain derivative or collateral cannot be considered as continuously 
active; 
(b) where relevant24, alternatively or additionally consider potential future 
situations that could affect the replaceability of transactions and/or the 
liquidity of collateral, in order to anticipate potentially reduced market 
depth and/or liquidity under future extreme but plausible economic 
scenarios based on justified expert opinions. 
(a) no prices for collateral or the relevant transactions can be obtained; 
(b) prices are unchanged (stale) for a number of consecutive days in markets 
where prices normally change more frequently; 
(c) smaller (local) but usually active markets – where the institution has no 
chance to “sidestep” to another market – could be subject to market-
specific stress events that affect the replaceability of transactions and/or 
the liquidity of collateral traded on these markets. 
(a) how to use the features and attributes mentioned in paragraph 
26, in 
particular for assessing market liquidity and potential concentrations 
regarding transactions and collateral with a given counterparty; 
(b) how historical events of market stress or reduced liquidity as mentioned in 
paragraph 
27(a) are identified to the extent historical analysis is used; 
(c) how stressed market conditions can be anticipated from future extreme but 
plausible economic scenarios as mentioned in paragraph 
27(b), using 
expert opinions; 





27. For the purpose of potential MPOR extensions, the illiquid collateral and hard-
to-replace transactions need to be identified under normal market conditions 
and under stressed market conditions. In order to derive conditions that 
characterise stressed market conditions as defined in Article 
285(3) second 
sub-paragraph of the CRR, the ECB sees benefit in establishing processes and 
methodologies that: 
28. For the purpose of paragraph 
27, the ECB sees benefit in defining and 
determining conditions under which: 
29. The ECB sees benefit in developing documented methodologies, including filter 
criteria, detailed identification of algorithms, etc., on the following: 


24 
This may refer in particular to situations where the historic evidence is scarce, missing or not sufficient 
to account for potential future situations or new markets. 



(d) how available data (e.g. bid-offer spread, volatilities, sensitivities, traded 
market volumes, etc., including from external data sources) are taken into 
account, potentially complemented by expert judgement25, if necessary. 


25 
For example, based on past experience or where no opinion from the trading desks is available. 


In order to derive sound qualitative and quantitative criteria to determine hard-
to-replace transactions and illiquid collateral under stressed and non-stressed 
market conditions, these methodologies, as well as the list of features and 
attributes to be monitored to identify these transactions and collateral (which 
may go beyond those set out in paragraph 
26 above) should be subject to 
internal validation. 


30. Finally, and independently from the issue of a potential MPOR extension, the 
ECB sees benefit in monitoring on an ongoing basis, from the overall 
institution’s portfolio perspective: 
(a) the size of hard-to-replace transactions and illiquid collateral; 
(b) the size of concentration in a single counterparty as set out in 
paragraph 
26(c) above. 





4 Collateral modelling 


31. This section deals with the modelling of cash and non-cash margin collateral, 
that is, its potential value changes from the time when the last margin call at the 
beginning of the MPOR is settled up to the end of the MPOR. Initial margin (IM) 
modelling is addressed in Section 
5. 


4.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 34 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

223, 224, 225, 226, 227 

 

285 

(1), (6), (7) 

292 

(1) 



 


32. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following. 
(a) Article 
292(1) of the CRR requires an institution to ensure the integrity of 
its modelling process by reflecting, among other things, transaction terms 
and specifications, which also include margining arrangements. However, 
it does not further specify how the future collateral composition or a 






reflection of the actual collateral balance in the IMM’s estimated exposure 
for a netting set should be reflected in the IMM’s assumptions. 
(b) Article 
285(1), (6) and (7) of the CRR clarifies the modelling options under 
which the effects of margining can be directly recognised in the exposure 
value calculation. 
(i) However, these provisions do not determine whether institutions 
should model margin collateral in a manner consistent with the 
modelling of securities underlying OTC derivatives and SFTs26, or 
whether they are allowed to adopt a different modelling approach for 
margin collateral, on the one hand, and securities underlying the 
different transactions, on the other. 
(ii) The provisions of Article 
285(6) of the CRR leave room for 
interpretation regarding the term “jointly modelled”. 
(iii) The wording of Article 
285(7)27 of the CRR leads to the conclusion 
that this article provides an exemption to Article 
285(6) of the CRR in 
cases where an institution is not able to model collateral jointly with 
the exposure. In this case, and in accordance with Article 
285(7) of 
the CRR, the institution is allowed to use volatility adjustments to 
recognise the effects of margining in the exposure calculation directly 
such that the institution does not have to apply one of the EEPE 
calculation measures presented in Article 
285(1)(a) or (b) of the CRR. 
(iv) In addition, Article 
285(1), (6) and (7) of the CRR is not specific about 
whether a combination of the two options (use of volatility 
adjustments and joint modelling) to account for margining effects is 
possible. Thus, it is not clear if it is possible to use volatility 
adjustments in line with Article 
285(7) of the CRR, together with the 
jointly modelled risk factors in accordance with Article 
285(6) of the 
CRR, for the collateral modelling in cases where, for some risk 
factors, the institution is able to model some collateral components 
jointly. 



(c) Article 
285(7) of the CRR refers to the standards of the Financial Collateral 
Comprehensive Method (as set out in Article 
223 of the CRR, which refers 
to Articles 
224 to 227 of the CRR) in cases where an institution wants to 
make use of volatility adjustments to recognise the effect of margining 
directly in its exposure calculation. Article 
223(1) third sub-paragraph of 
the CRR requires institutions to apply a volatility adjustment to reflect 
mismatches between the collateral currency and the settlement currency 
for OTC derivative transactions covered by recognised netting 





26 
See the definition in the 


Counterparty credit risk glossary. 


27 
“If an institution is not able to model collateral jointly with the exposure [in accordance with 
Article 
285(6) of the CRR] it shall not recognise […] the effect of collateral […], unless it uses […] 
volatility adjustments […].” 



agreements. However, Article 
223(1) third sub-paragraph of the CRR 
neither defines exactly what the settlement currency is, nor its relationship 
with the currency in which the exposure is denominated in the context of 
netting sets with attached margin agreements. In addition, the case of 
these currencies being different from the reporting currency is not treated 
explicitly. 


4.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


33. The ECB sees as a best practice that non-cash margin collateral is treated in a 
manner that is consistent with the modelling of securities underlying OTC or 
SFT transactions, provided that these transactions are within the scope of the 
IMM. For example, if a certain type of security is fully simulated (or if a volatility 
adjustment is applied) in the security leg of an SFT, then it should also be fully 
simulated (or a volatility adjustment should also be applied) if it occurs as 
margin collateral within the IMM. In the case of inconsistent treatment, the ECB 
sees it as beneficial that the institution is able to justify this choice and to 
demonstrate that (i) 
its approach does not systematically underestimate 
exposures and (ii) 
the quantitative impact on the final EEPE is not material. 
34. In order to comply with the requirements laid down by Article 
292(1)(a) and (b) 
of the CRR with respect to the terms of margining and netting arrangements, 
the ECB is of the view that the future composition of the collateral pool over the 
lifetime of the netting set should reflect one or more of the following: 
(a) the contractual arrangements in terms of eligible margin collateral; 
(b) the institution’s policy as regards posted collateral types28 being eligible; 
(c) the composition observed historically;29 
(d) at least the current composition of the margin collateral pool. 





28 
This requires the institution to have a clear and well-documented policy further limiting the contractually 
eligible collateral to certain types of posted collateral. 


29 
This includes the use of a historically observed composition of collateral for counterparties with a 
comparable behaviour in the case of new agreements, i.e. 
agreements with new counterparties without 
their own history in the institution. 


This holds for the same or similar characteristics of these collateral types. 


35. When a contractual margin agreement contains transactions treated under both 
the IMM and a non-IMM method and therefore the contractual netting set is split 
into different synthetic netting sets, and if collateral modelling uses the actual 
collateral balance at 𝑡0, the ECB considers that the actual margin collateral 
should be assigned to the synthetic netting sets. This should be done in a way 
that also reflects their respective current exposures, as defined in 
Article 
272(17) of the CRR, and does not lead to double-counting of collateral. If 
the institution chooses a different approach (e.g. 
a full assignment of collateral 
to only one synthetic netting set), it should be able to justify this choice and 



demonstrate that its methodology does not systematically underestimate the 
resulting exposure values. 
36. The ECB considers the use of the “model-estimated collateral balance at 𝑡0”30 
to be compliant with Article 
292(1)(b) of the CRR, if the resulting modelled 
collateral balance is regularly benchmarked against the actual collateral 
balance at 𝑡0 in accordance with Article 
292(1)(g) of the CRR. In this case, 
validated but still relevant differences between model-estimated and actual 𝑡0 
collateral balances should be taken into account in the modelling of 𝑡0 so that 
the exposure value is not systematically underestimated. Transactions that are 
potentially carved out from the IMM as well as collateral potentially not yet 
settled at 𝑡0 should also be taken into account. 
37. It can be inferred from Article 
285(6) in conjunction with Article 
285(7) of the 
CRR that, in order to directly capture the effects of margining in the calculation 
of exposure values, an institution can use either of the following: 
(a) the option of joint modelling (Article 
285(6) of the CRR) for the modelling of 
all collateral; 
(b) the volatility adjustment option (Article 
285(7) of the CRR) for the 
modelling of all collateral. 



38. The ECB is of the view that using both options at the same time would only be 
compliant with the above CRR articles if volatility adjustments for non-cash 
collateral were used and the joint modelling for the treatment of FX risk were 
applied in the collateral modelling only. In this context, the ECB considers it to 
be good practice that the above combination can only be made by using jointly 
modelled FX rates for all currencies that are simulated for the exposure 
calculation under the IMM. In other words, the ECB would not consider a partial 
application of FX volatility adjustments alongside jointly modelled FX rates for 
the purpose of collateral modelling as being consistent. 
39. In the context of Article 
285(6) of the CRR, the ECB understands the provision 
“an institution shall model collateral … jointly with the exposure in its exposure 
value calculation” as requiring model integrity in accordance with 
Article 
292(1)(a) and (b) of the CRR. This means in particular that: 
(a) the collateral value changes over time and during the MPOR are 
determined by using the same model as for the calculation of the 
transactions’ value changes; 
(b) the use of the same model refers to the IMM’s general modelling features 
(including simulated and non-simulated risk factors, the dependency 
structure, pricing functions, etc.), which should be used for both the 





30 
That is, when the 𝑡0 collateral balance is estimated as a function of the calculated netting set value as 
of 𝑡0 
– using IMM pricing functions and modelled features of the margin agreement 
– and is not set as 
being equal to the actual collateral balance. 



calculation of the transactions’ value changes and the calculation of 
collateral value changes applying the same generated scenarios; 
(a) when Article 
223(1) second sub-paragraph of the CRR uses the term “the 
currency in which the underlying exposure of the netting set is 
denominated”, and when Article 
223(1) third sub-paragraph of the CRR 
(for OTC derivative transactions only) uses the term “settlement currency”, 
it is the currency as determined in (b); 
(b) it is the currency: 
(i) agreed in the individual derivative contract if no netting has been 
agreed upon; or 
(ii) of the relevant governing master netting agreement if agreed without 
a credit support annex; or 
(iii) of the relevant credit support annex, if agreed; or 
(iv) of the close-out amount if more than one credit support annex has 
been defined for one master netting agreement. 






(c) if some risk factors are not required for the calculation of the transactions’ 
value changes and are only used for the collateral modelling, these risk 
factors should be modelled consistently with those for derivatives and 
SFTs within the scope of the IMM, also regarding the dependency 
structure. 


40. Article 
285(7) of the CRR provides that, if an institution is not able to model 
collateral jointly with the exposure, it may use volatility adjustments to recognise 
the effects of margining on the exposure itself, provided the institution complies 
with the requirements of the Financial Collateral Comprehensive Method as per 
Article 
223 of the CRR. If an institution needs to apply volatility adjustments to 
recognise the effects of margining on the exposure itself, these adjustments 
must be applied to reflect currency mismatches in accordance with 
Article 
223(1) third sub-paragraph of the CRR. In the light of Article 
220(2)(d) of 
the CRR, the ECB sees the identification of the currency that is potentially 
different from the collateral currency as described below as best practice: 
41. In the view of the ECB, in order to comply with Article 
292(1)(a) and (b) of the 
CRR for both unmargined and margined cases, and with Article 
292(1)(a) and 
(b) in conjunction with Article 
285(6) and (7) for margined cases, institutions 
should take into account the potential FX risk arising from currency 
mismatches. The potential mismatches are between (i) 
any of the various 
currencies of the exposure components (e.g. 
various transactions with different 
currencies, collateral types with different currencies) and (ii) 
the currency in 
which the netting set’s total exposure is determined in the simulation (e.g. 
the 
currency of the governing master agreement as explained in paragraph 
40). 
The ECB considers that potential FX risk is treated in compliance with 
Article 
292(1)(a) and (b) of the CRR by applying either of the following: 



(a) simulation of FX rates for all exposure components at all relevant points in 
time; 
(b) FX volatility adjustments in accordance with Article 
223(1) of the CRR 
when making use of Article 
285(7) of the CRR. 





42. It is the understanding of the ECB that any potentially remaining FX risk that 
arises from currency mismatches between (i) 
the currency in which the netting 
set’s exposure is determined in the simulation and (ii) 
the reporting currency 
should be taken into account in the institutions’ modelling process. The ECB 
considers the treatment of this potentially remaining FX risk to be compliant with 
Article 
292(1)(a) and (b) of the CRR if institutions apply the simulated FX rates 
at the end of the MPOR.31 


31 
The additional use of simulated FX rates applies in particular to those cases where the currency as per 
Article 
223(1) of the CRR differs from the reporting currency, but also to cases of joint modelling where, 
for example, the netting set’s currency and the collateral currency are different from each other and 
from the reporting currency. 


32 
Regulation (EU) No 
648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 
July 2012 on OTC 
derivatives, central counterparties and trade repositories. 


5 Modelling of initial margin 


43. IM is already applied in central clearing and currently carries over to bilateral 
OTC agreements. The modelling issue with respect to CCR is that the IM 
depends on the risk profile of the future netting set in terms of the levels and 
volatility of simulated market risk factors and on transactions still alive, i.e. 
it is a 
variable agreement parameter. 


To be clear, it should be specified that “IM modelling” refers here to the 
modelling of IM under the IMM and not, for example, to the implementation of 
European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR)32 requirements in the 
institutions’ collateral management in terms of calculating an appropriate level 
of IM. 


5.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 35 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

292 

(1)(b) and (g) 

293 

(1)(b) 



 


44. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following: 



(a) Article 
292(1)(b) of the CRR, which requires institutions to include, among 
other transaction terms, margining and netting arrangements in the model; 
Article 
292(1)(g) of the CRR, which requires processes for formal 
reconciliation between the model and source data systems; 
(b) Article 
293(1)(b) of the CRR, which notably requires the comparison of risk 
measures generated by the model with realised risk measures. 





5.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


45. In relation to the requirements set out in Article 
292(1)(b) of the CRR, and for 
agreements subject to IM where both the transaction exposures and IM are 
within the scope of the IMM, the ECB considers it good practice that institutions 
have an IM modelling that adequately reflects contractual arrangements for the 
respective netting set.33 In particular, if contractual arrangements provide that 
the IM should reflect forward variability and maturing transactions34 inside 
netting set value changes relevant for the contractual IM method, the IMM 
modelling of the IM should take this feature into account unless the institution 
demonstrates that its choice for IM modelling inside the IMM does not 
systematically underestimate exposures. 
46. The ECB considers that, in order to avoid the risk of non-compliance with 
Articles 
292(1)(b) and 293(1)(b) of the CRR, the level of the modelled IM at 𝑡0 
should be benchmarked on a regular basis against the respective real margin at 
𝑡0 in accordance with Article 
292(1)(g) of the CRR. Validated but still relevant 
differences should be taken into account in the modelling (e.g. 
by using some 
corrective exposure level add-on if the modelling is not risk sensitive and/or 
may lead to non-conservative exposures). 


33 
In cases where IM agreements include discretionary or undisclosed elements, institutions are still 
expected to consider all contractual arrangements to the extent possible when modelling the IM within 
the IMM, potentially also taking the history of observed IMs into account. This includes potential 
information and assumptions for past IM amounts. 


34 
A contractual IM specification includes IM changes resulting from newly contracted transactions, 
whereas the IMM modelling starts with the portfolio at 𝑡0 and then has a “melting down” portfolio, since 
the effect of new trades is modelled only through the EEPE. 


6 Maturity 


47. This section refers to the estimation of the parameter M used in the calculation 
of the risk weight for counterparties, towards which the institution has an IMM 
exposure and for which the institution uses the IRB approach. 
48. The section also refers to the treatment of contingent transaction maturities, 
especially where there are early termination clauses (ETCs, also called break 
clauses) for derivatives and SFTs, and to different CRR interpretations. 


Note that transaction maturities (and their changes) affect (i) 
the M parameter of 
Article 
162 of the CRR, (ii) 
the shape of the EE(t) time profile, and (iii) 
the 


maximum transaction maturity relevant for Article 
284(6) of the CRR, where 
(i) 
affects the calculation of risk-weighted assets (RWAs) for IRB institutions and 
(ii) 
and (iii) 
affect the calculation of the EEPE and then (via the exposure value) 
also RWAs. 


6.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 36 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

162 

 

284 

(4), (6) 



 


49. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following: 


Article 
162 (defining the maturity parameter M) and Article 
284(4)35 and (6) 
(defining the remaining transaction maturity) of the CRR. Contingent transaction 
maturities and contractual arrangements for early termination are not mentioned 
in these articles. 


35 
Article 
284(4) of the CRR stipulates: “The model shall estimate EE at a series of future dates t1, t2, t3, 
etc.” 


6.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


50. Article 
162 of the CRR will be understood as outlined below for the exclusive 
purpose of applying the IMM as specified by Part 
Three, Title 
II, Chapter 
6, 
Section 
6 of the CRR. In the ECB’s understanding, the article should apply in 
the following way: 
(a) paragraph 
(2)(b) should apply to unmargined derivatives subject to a 
master netting agreement if the longest-dated contract in the netting set 
has a maturity of less than or equal to one year; 
(b) paragraph 
(2)(c) should apply to fully or nearly fully collateralised 
derivatives or fully or nearly fully collateralised margin lending transactions 
subject to a master netting agreement if the longest-dated contract in the 
netting set has a maturity of less than or equal to one year; 
(c) paragraph 
(2)(d) should apply to unmargined and margined SFTs 
(excluding margin lending transactions) subject to a master netting 
agreement if the longest-dated contract in the netting set has a maturity of 
less than or equal to one year; 






(d) paragraph 
(2)(g) should apply to all transactions not subject to a master 
netting agreement, on the one hand, and to multiple transaction netting 
sets where the maturity of the transaction or the longest-dated contract 
within the netting set is greater than one year, on the other hand, unless 
the conditions for applying paragraph 
(2)(i) are satisfied; 
(e) if the conditions of paragraph 
(2)(i) are fulfilled, setting M to one year 
should apply only for those transactions or netting sets where the 
application of paragraphs 
(2)(a), (b), (c), (d), (f) or (g) would result in M 
being greater than one year; 
(f) the provisions of paragraph 
(3) regarding the floor value for M should be 
used in the following way: when applying paragraph 
(2)(c) or (2)(d) for the 
purpose of estimating M for a given netting set, an institution should be 
allowed to use the floor value provided by paragraph 
(3) (one business 
day), if all paragraph 
(3) requirements are fulfilled. 
(a) If the institution has the right to terminate the transaction, in the ECB’s 
view the transaction maturity should be set at the higher of: 
(i) the contractually agreed first date on which the transaction can be 
terminated; 
(ii) the applicable MPOR. 



(b) If the institution does not have the right to terminate the transaction, the 
ECB considers that the transaction maturity should be given by the longest 
past lifetime of transactions with the same or comparable counterparties, 
subject to a five-year cap. 
(a) it is seen by the ECB as best practice that non-mandatory ETCs are not 
used for the calculation of EE as used in Article 
284(4) and (6) of the CRR, 
and of M, as provided for in Article 
162(2) of the CRR (this article aims to 
deal only with a non-contingent maturity), unless the institution can 
demonstrate that non-mandatory ETCs are regularly exercised based on 
an assessment of past exercise events. This can be the case: 
(i) generally, i.e. it is possible to calibrate an expected exercise 
likelihood for non-mandatory ETCs jointly across all paths; or 
(ii) subject to specific, pre-defined market conditions, which allow 
expected exercise events to be identified along a particular scenario 
path. 








51. The CRR is silent on the transaction maturity that should be considered for both 
the calculation of the EEPE and the calculation of the M parameter in the case 
of open term repos or, in general, SFTs without an explicitly fixed maturity. 
52. For derivatives with ETCs: 



(b) the ECB also considers it as compliant with Article 
162(2) and (3) of the 
CRR to use mandatory ETCs for the calculation of EE and M instead of 
the contractual maturity, because there cannot be any positive exposure 
after that date due to the provisions of Article 
284(4) of the CRR. However, 
the ECB would expect institutions to provide a legal opinion confirming the 
enforceability of the respective legal clauses. In particular, mandatory 
ETCs are part of the transaction terms that must be reflected in the model 
as required by Article 
292(1)(a) and (b) of the CRR. 
• five business days for netting sets consisting only of SFTs; 
• ten business days for all other netting sets, including the derivative 
instruments listed in Annex II of the CRR. 





53. Internal analyses by the institutions should be able to justify, as the case may 
be, choices of M values shorter than: 


In accordance with Article 
162(3) of the CRR, provisions for prompt liquidation 
need to be in place in order to use short M values. If these provisions are 
different for the M parameter referred to in Article 
162 of the CRR than in the 
IMM exposure modelling of margined trading, the appropriateness of shorter 
close-out periods would also have to be demonstrated. 


54. The ECB sees it as best practice when the estimation of the maturity of 
physically settled options on derivatives (e.g. 
swaptions, used for the purpose of 
calculating the parameter M and for the calculation of the EEPE) is made on the 
basis of the maturity date of the underlying derivatives (e.g. 
the swap underlying 
the swaption), unless the institution is able to justify the use of a different 
maturity for specific products.36 


36 
One example is when an underlying swap becomes subject to central clearing and thus the 
counterparty changes. 


7 Granularity, number of time steps and scenarios 


55. This section refers to the chosen time grid for the future exposure calculation 
and the number of scenarios generated. More specifically: 
(a) the number and density of time grid points have an impact on the accuracy 
of EE profiles and thus also on the accuracy of the EEPE; 
(b) the number of scenarios and the type of random number generator 
determine the numerical accuracy of the calculations and thus the 
statistical error of expected exposures. 






7.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 37 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

284 

(4), (5), (6) 

292 

(1)(a), (b) 

293 

(1)(a), (c) 

294 

(1) 

368 

(1)(f) 



 


56. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following. 
(a) In accordance with Article 
292(1)(a) of the CRR, an institution must ensure 
that the model reflects transaction terms and specifications in a timely, 
complete and conservative fashion. Article 
292(1)(b) of the CRR specifies 
that these terms must include at least the contract notional amounts, 
maturity, reference assets, margining arrangements and netting 
arrangements. However, it stays silent on the number of grid points 
necessary to take CFs resulting from these terms into account. 
(b) In accordance with Article 
284(4) of the CRR, EE must be calculated for 
time grid points 𝑡𝑖=1,2,3,… The output, 𝐸𝐸(𝑡𝑖), is used in the EEPE 
calculations (Article 
284(5) and (6) of the CRR). However, there is no 
specific requirement as to how to set these 𝑡𝑖values. 
(c) Article 
293(1)(c) of the CRR requires an institution to carry out initial and 
ongoing validation of its CCR exposure model, while Article 
294(1) states 
the requirements that need to be met by the institution’s validation 
programme. While there is no explicit requirement regarding the number of 
scenarios in Article 
294 of the CRR, Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR (which is 
included in the reference to Part 
Three, Title 
IV, Chapter 
5 of the CRR 
made by Article 
293(1)(a) of the CRR) requires the internal model to have 
a proven track record of “reasonable accuracy” in measuring risks. 






7.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


Since the modelling process has to reflect transaction terms, as required by Article 
292(1)(a) and (b) of the CRR, in the understanding 
of the ECB the density and location of grid points as defined in Article 
284(4) of the CRR should capture intermediate and final trade-
related CFs depending on notional amounts, maturities, etc. that influence the shape of the exposure profile. The ECB also considers 
that, if the EEPE calculated with a very dense time grid37 is more than 5% above38 the EEPE as calculated by the institution using its 
standard set of grid points under the standard configuration of the IMM for the whole portfolio, then the ECB can increase the alpha 
parameter following the process described in Section 
12.39 Institutions can conduct this impact assessment on representative sub-
portfolios as defined in the 


37 
The expression “very dense time grid” means here a daily grid, unless the institution can show that all 
CFs are captured with a coarser time grid. 


38 
However, the impact of any numerical error (see paragraph 
0) could also be considered in order to 
avoid potential double counting if the institution can demonstrate a corresponding overlap. 


39 
For example, if the difference is more than 5%, the alpha parameter could be increased by at least 
0.05, etc. 


40 
See the Annex for a description of how to derive the statistical error at a 95% confidence level. 


41 
For example, if the error is more than 5%, the alpha parameter could be increased by at least 0.05, etc. 


57. Counterparty credit risk glossary. 


The ECB is of the view that, in order to fulfil the requirements set out in Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR, the estimation and monitoring of 
the numerical error of the EEPE due to the number of scenarios should be part of the regular validation programme mentioned in 
Articles 
293(1)(c) and 294(1)(d) of the CRR. If the numerical error40 is more than 5% of the EEPE for the whole portfolio, the ECB can 
increase the alpha parameter following the process described in Section 
12.41 Institutions can conduct this impact assessment on 
representative sub-portfolios as defined in the 


58. Counterparty credit risk glossary. 


8 Calibration frequency and stress calibration 


59. The calibration frequency is relevant both for regulatory reporting and for 
internal risk management (line consumption, etc.) as part of the use test 
requirements set by Article 
289 of the CRR: 
(a) for Pillar 1 purposes, Article 
292(2) of the CRR requires that the minimum 
quarterly frequency is increased to reflect (important) changes in market 
conditions; 
(b) for internal risk management purposes, the calibration frequency also 
affects the quality of exposure numbers used for the institution’s day-to-
day risk management process. 



60. To compute own funds requirements for CCR, Article 
284(3) of the CRR 
requires that institutions use two different calibrations: one based on current 
market data, and one based on a stress period. 



8.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 38 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

 

 

284 

(3)(b) 

289 

(1), (4), (5) 

292 

(2), (3), (4) 



 


61. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following. 
(a) Article 
289(1) of the CRR requires among other things “that the distribution 
of exposures generated by the model used to calculate EEPE is closely 
integrated into the day-to-day CCR management process of the 
institution”, without further specifying the meaning of “closely integrated”. 
Article 
289(4) of the CRR requires that institutions measure and manage 
current exposures; Article 
289(5) requires them to have system capabilities 
to estimate EE daily if necessary, unless they can demonstrate to the 
satisfaction of their competent authorities that their exposures to CCR 
warrant less frequent calculation. 
(b) In accordance with Article 
284(3)(b) of the CRR, institutions must compute 
the EEPE using a stress calibration. This provision should be read in the 
light of Article 
292(2) of the CRR, which sets out the requirements of the 
stress calibration, and Article 
292(3) of the CRR, which sets out the 
requirements for the stress period determination. 
(c) In accordance with Article 
292(4) of the CRR, the EPE model must use 
data 
– implied or historical 
– that include the data from the stressed credit 
period and must use such data in a manner consistent with the method 
used for the calibration of the EPE model to current data. It does not 
further specify the meaning of “consistent”. 





8.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


62. The ECB considers that Article 
289(1) of the CRR should be understood as 
implying that the exposure distribution used for internal risk measurement in the 
day-to-day CCR management process is sufficiently up to date for daily line 
consumption calculations. Accordingly, the revaluation of current exposure42 for 
internal risk management purposes should also be performed on a daily basis 
in compliance with Article 
289(4) and (5) of the CRR. The ECB regards a 
monthly or higher frequency for the recalibration of the parameters of the 


42 
Current exposure is the starting point at 𝑡0 for every EE time profile. 



underlying stochastic processes (such as drift, volatility and correlation) for 
internal risk management as good practice to minimise the risk of non-
compliance with Article 
292(2) and Article 
289(5) of the CRR, since an outdated 
calibration may no longer reflect market conditions or adequately reflect the 
exposure profile. 
63. In order to comply with Article 
292(2) and (4) of the CRR, the following holds: 
(a) The ECB considers as best practice that parameters underlying the 
stochastic processes of the EPE model are calibrated with the data from 
the identified stress period (i.e. 
with the exact three years of data defining 
the stress period in the case of historical data) using the same estimation 
method that is applied for the current calibration. This comprises, in 
particular, the parameters needed for the simulation of market risk factors, 
the pricing of transactions and collateral valuation. It is expected that the 
adequacy of expert-set parameters for the identified stress period is 
assessed and, if applicable, their values are adjusted accordingly. 
(b) The ECB would accept an alternative stress calibration method for 
parameters other than volatilities and correlations if the institution is able to 
demonstrate that its approach is consistent with its current calibration (for 
example, regarding the length of the calibration window or boundary 
conditions that need to be satisfied) and does not systematically 
underestimate exposures. 





9 Use test 


64. This section refers to implementations of the IMM as used by internal risk 
management and calculation of the internal line consumption. 


9.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 39 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

289 

(2) and (3) 

286 

(4) to (6) 



 


65. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are as follows. 
(a) Article 
289 of the CRR includes the following provisions. 
(i) Paragraph 
(2) of this article requires that institutions demonstrate to 
the satisfaction of the competent authorities that they have been 









using a model to calculate the distribution of exposures upon which 
the EPE calculation is based that broadly meets the requirements set 
out in Section 6 of the CRR for at least one year prior to permission to 
use the IMM being granted by the competent authorities in 
accordance with Article 
283 of the CRR. 
(ii) Paragraph 
(3) of this article requires, among other things, that the 
model used to generate a distribution of exposures to CCR is part of 
the CCR management framework required by Article 
286 of the CRR. 



(b) Article 
286 of the CRR includes the following provisions. 
(i) Paragraph 
(4) of this article requires, among other things, that an 
institution's management body and senior management are actively 
involved in, and ensure that adequate resources are allocated to, the 
management of CCR. It also requires that senior management is 
aware of the limitations and assumptions of the model used and the 
impact those limitations and assumptions can have on the reliability 
of the output through a formal process. 
(ii) Paragraph 
(5) of this article requires that the daily reports prepared 
on an institution's exposures to CCR in accordance with 
Article 
287(2)(b) are reviewed by a level of management with 
sufficient seniority and authority to enforce both reductions in 
positions taken by individual credit managers or traders and 
reductions in the institution's overall CCR exposure. 
(iii) Paragraph 
(6) of this article requires, among other things, that an 
institution's CCR management framework is used in conjunction with 
internal credit and trading limits, which need to be related to the 
institution's risk measurement model in a manner that is consistent 
over time and that is well understood by credit managers, traders and 
senior management. 








66. Articles 
289(2) and 283(2) of the CRR are not explicit as to whether the same 
use test requirements that need to be applied for model approval should also be 
applied to model changes and extensions. It is the ECB’s understanding that 
the early implementation of these requirements would provide benefits in terms 
of model use and supervision, and that their implementation would be 
consistent with the rationale behind these articles. 


9.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


67. In accordance with the aim of Article 
289(2) of the CRR regarding the upfront 
use of a new model, the ECB considers it good practice for an institution to start 
by applying the envisaged model changes or extensions for internal risk 
management purposes to acquire sufficient experience with the change or 
extension before it is fully implemented. This would apply in cases where the 



change or extension needs to be investigated as set out in the ECB Guide on 
materiality assessment (EGMA).43 This upfront use should start no later than 
the application date (i.e. the date of the application letter) in the live production 
environment for exposure calculations for the purpose of risk management. The 
institution should determine the most appropriate upfront use of the model 
changes or extensions in order to acquire sufficient experience, taking into 
consideration its situation and the nature of the extension or change. The ECB 
has identified the following possible ways for an institution to make appropriate 
upfront use of the model changes and extensions and also to test Pillar 1 own 
funds requirements: 
(a) implement the change or extension in the live production environment44 
used to calculate limit utilisation for internal risk management on a daily 
basis; or 
(b) implement the change or extension in a non-live production environment45, 
where weekly test runs are recommended, in which case it is further 
recommended that the institution 
(i) uses the test results to calibrate and document limits that might need 
an update; 
(ii) identifies and plans the necessary steps for the updated limits to 
become effective as soon as the supervisory approval envisaged in 
the EGMA for the planned change or extension is obtained; 
(iii) plans all other processes and controls outlined in Article 
289 of the 
CRR that are to be applied after the permission, in particular ensuring 
IT performance regarding the calculation frequency. 








43 
ECB Guide on materiality assessment (EGMA) – Materiality assessment for IMM and ACVA model 
extensions and changes. 


44 
See paragraph 
7 of the credit risk chapter. 


45 
As defined in paragraph 
7 of the credit risk chapter. 


The implementation should be done in such a way that the institution gains 
sufficient understanding of the intended changes or extensions to its model and 
its outputs, for instance by providing relevant figures for information purposes in 
addition to the relevant figures from the model in production for Pillar 1 own 
fund requirements. 


68. The practices set out in paragraph 
67 above are recommended for all model 
extensions according to the EGMA but are recommended for model changes 
only in the following cases: 
(a) changes in exposure levels (e.g. due to changes in risk factor forecasting, 
capturing of margining effects or collateral modelling); 






(b) changes of data management/supply (e.g. due to changes of input data or 
data sources including the use of additional data/data sources or changes 
of the data quality control processes); 
(c) significant IT system changes (including software changes); 
(d) changes in regular quantitative validation that have a quantitative impact 
on how the institution assesses the integrity of the IMM. 





If an extension or a change affecting any of the above items (a) to (d) is 
classified as “to be investigated” by the EGMA, this upfront implementation 
should be completed within a sufficient time (recommended to be at least three 
months) before the date of the application letter. 


Where the institution notifies ex ante an extension or a change affecting any of 
the above items (a) to (d), the ECB sees it as best practice for the institution to 
first run a one-month use test (or non-live implementation) if there is a 
considerable impact on limit utilisation for certain transactions, netting sets or 
counterparties that are particularly affected by the change or extension owing to 
its nature. 


Article 
286(4) to (6) of the CRR (to which Article 
289(3) refers) requires in 
general that the institution’s management and senior management are actively 
involved in the management of the CCR model. The ECB considers that as well 
as being involved in the upfront use of a changed or extended model, the 
management and senior management should also be involved in approving any 
limit change resulting from the prior implementation of an IMM model change or 
extension in the live production environment as envisaged in paragraph 
67(a) 
above, or any limit change or extension expected to result from the tests in the 
non-live production environment as envisaged in paragraph 
67(b) above. 


10 Validation 


69. This section refers to the validation framework set up by institutions to assess 
the performance of the CCR exposure model, in particular back-testing 
methodologies, the validation of pricing functions and further checks on key 
modelling assumptions. 



10.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 40 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

287 

(2) 

292 

(1)(a), (b), (g), (6)(a) 

293 

(1)(b), (c), (4) 

294 

(1)(c), (d), (e), (g), (h), (i), 
(j), (l), (o) 



 


70. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are as follows. 
(a) Article 
287(2) of the CRR states that the risk control unit is expected to be 
responsible for the initial and ongoing validation of the model. 
Furthermore, Article 
293(1)(c) of the CRR provides that the validation and 
review must be conducted independently of model development, which 
needs to be reconciled with Article 
287(2) of the CRR given that model 
development is usually also done within the risk control unit. 
(b) Article 
293(4) of the CRR requires, among other things, that institutions 
“maintain a written policy that describes the process by which 
unacceptable performance will be identified and remedied”, without further 
describing what constitutes unacceptable performance and what the 
remedies might be. 
(c) According to Article 
292(6)(a) of the CRR, “an institution shall subject the 
model to a validation process that specifies the kind of testing needed to 
ensure model integrity and identify conditions under which the 
assumptions underlying the model are inappropriate and therefore result in 
an understatement of EPE”. However, the CRR does not further specify 
which assumptions should form part of the validation process. 
(d) Article 
293(1)(b) of the CRR requires institutions to conduct “a regular 
programme of back-testing” but does not further specify the frequency of 
the back-testing. 
(e) Regarding the requirements laid out with respect to back-testing levels46 
and methodologies, Article 
294(1)(c) of the CRR provides that “an 
institution shall back-test the performance of its CCR exposure model and 
the model’s relevant risk measures as well as market risk factor 
predictions”, without mentioning any restrictions. Article 
294(1)(h) of the 
CRR requires the model validation process to “include static, historical 
back-testing on representative counterparty portfolios that are actual or 
hypothetical”, not specifying whether the “or” in this sentence is an 





46 
Back-testing levels refer to the risk factor level, the transaction level, and the actual and/or hypothetical 
portfolio level. 



inclusive or exclusive “or”. According to Article 
294(1)(i) and (j) of the CRR, 
“back-testing shall be designed to test the relevant risk measures” and 
furthermore “be appropriate and capable of identifying poor performance in 
an EPE model’s risk measure”. 
(f) Article 
294(1)(g) of the CRR states that “as part of the initial and ongoing 
validation of its CCR exposure model and its risk measures, an institution 
shall ensure that the CCR exposure model includes transaction-specific 
information to capture the effects of margining”, without specifying any 
further details of the expected validation tasks. 
(g) Article 
292(1)(a) of the CRR requires that the model reflect transaction 
terms and specifications in a timely, complete and conservative fashion 
(also regarding pricing and the market data to be used). Article 
292(1)(b) 
of the CRR specifies that those terms include, at least, notional amounts, 
maturity, reference assets, margining arrangements and netting 
arrangements. Article 
292(1)(g) of the CRR requires ongoing processes for 
reconciliation between the model and source data, which verify that 
transaction terms and specifications are reflected correctly or at least 
conservatively. 
(h) Article 
294(1)(e) of the CRR provides that, as part of the initial and 
ongoing validation process, an institution “shall test the pricing models 
used to calculate CCR exposure for a given scenario of future shocks to 
market risk factors”, as well as regularly testing these pricing models 
against appropriate independent benchmarks in accordance with 
Article 
294(1)(l) of the CRR. 
(i) As outlined in Article 
294(1)(o) of the CRR, “the initial and ongoing 
validation of CCR exposure models shall assess whether or not the 
counterparty level and netting set exposure calculations of exposure are 
appropriate”. Article 
294(1)(d) of the CRR provides that “if the model 
validation indicates that EEPE is underestimated, the institution shall take 
the action necessary to address the inaccuracy of the model”. Both 
requirements are set out in a general way and therefore need further 
guidance. 
(j) Article 
292(1)(a) of the CRR requires the model to reflect transaction terms 
which must be ensured by formal reconciliation processes between the 
model and source data in accordance with point (g) of the same article. 


10.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


71. In accordance with Article 
293(1)(c) of the CRR, model validation/review and 
model development must be conducted independently, that is, the validation 
function as defined in the glossary must be effectively separated from model 
development. Hence, the ECB considers that for cases where certain parts of 
the validation framework, e.g. 
back-testing or the benchmarking of IMM pricing 



functions, are conducted by staff also responsible for model design and 
development, the above-mentioned requirement provided for by 
Article 
293(1)(c) of the CRR would be fulfilled if all of the following practices 
were implemented: 
(a) a regular, independent and effective challenging of the underlying 
methodological aspects of the respective validation task comprising at 
least scope, data samples, tools/statistical tests (including, if applicable, 
test statistics and thresholds47 in use) is performed by the validation 
function; 
(b) the assessment of the outcomes of the analysis (e.g. 
the evaluation of 
back-testing traffic lights or pricing deficiencies detected in the 
benchmarking) and the judgement regarding the respective remediation 
measures are reviewed by the validation function, which may require 
further analyses and/or changes to the actions concerned. 





47 
This refers, for example, to thresholds used for back-testing traffic lights or for the benchmarking of 
pricing functions. 


48 
Please refer to Section 
1.7 of the general topics chapter of this guide regarding the principle that the 
internal audit function should not be responsible for validation. 


49 
At least in the event of poor back-testing results, the chosen stochastic processes should be thoroughly 
challenged. 


Moreover, the ECB considers that the organisational requirements of the risk 
control unit (see Article 
287(2) of the CRR) should be regarded as fulfilled when 
(part of) the initial or ongoing validation of the model is conducted by staff not 
belonging directly to the risk control unit, but for instance to a separate 
validation unit.48 


As part of the process by which unacceptable performance will be identified and 
remedied in accordance with Article 
293(4) of the CRR, the ECB considers that 
it is good practice to ensure a comprehensive view of all the findings, problems, 
weaknesses and limits of the exposure model, identified by all staff contributing 
to the validation and review of the exposure model. 


72. The validation framework is expected to cover the kind of testing needed to 
ensure model integrity and the appropriateness of assumptions underlying the 
model in accordance with Article 
292(6)(a) of the CRR. The ECB considers as 
best practice the inclusion of various types of analyses on the key modelling 
assumptions in a regular validation schedule. In particular, it is the ECB’s 
understanding that the key modelling assumptions contain: 
(a) the grid point setting; 
(b) the chosen stochastic processes49; 
(c) the Monte Carlo error of the EEPE (see paragraph 
0); 
(d) expert-set parameters and boundaries in use (such as caps and floors for 
risk factor paths); 






(e) all pricing functions used in the IMM; 
(f) modelling features regarding margining, i.e. the MPOR setting, agreement-
dependent variation margin and IM mechanisms and the modelling of 
collateral value changes during the MPOR. 
(a) next to a simple number-based51 approach, institutions should take into 
account different weighting schemes like sensitivities and exposure 
metrics; 
(b) at risk factor level, in addition to the full risk factor set52, coverage ratios 
should also be calculated by asset class;53 





73. In order to comply with Article 
293(1)(b) of the CRR, the ECB sees it as best 
practice if back-testing is performed and reported on at least once a year. 
74. In accordance with Article 
294(1)(c) of the CRR, back-testing at risk factor level 
is mandatory. In the ECB’s view, not all key assumptions of the CCR exposure 
model (mentioned in Article 
294(1)(i) of the CRR) can be captured when back-
testing is only conducted on hypothetical portfolios, in particular when 
considering non-plain vanilla transactions or margined netting sets. Hence, in 
the light of Article 
294(1)(h) of the CRR, the ECB regards back-testing at both 
actual and hypothetical portfolio level as good practice. 
75. In order to support the analysis of portfolio back-testing and mitigate the risk of 
breaching Article 
294(1)(e) and (i) of the CRR, it is recommended and seen as 
good practice to include back-testing at single transaction level in the regular 
framework. 
76. According to Article 
294(1)(h) of the CRR, back-testing samples50 must be 
representative and chosen on the basis of their sensitivity to material risk 
factors as well as their combinations. As stated in point (j) of the same 
paragraph in Article 
294, the institution’s back-testing programme must be 
capable of identifying poor performance of an EPE model’s risk measures. As a 
result, the ECB considers that back-testing samples should allow for a 
meaningful assessment of the CCR exposure model and that institutions should 
ensure a comprehensive coverage of their back-testing framework by 
calculating back-testing coverage ratios (i.e. 
shares of back-tested risk factors 
or portfolios), at least at risk factor and, if applicable, at actual portfolio level. In 
particular: 


50 
This refers to samples comprising the subset of risk factors, transactions or portfolios, including margin 
agreements used for the purpose of back-testing. 


51 
This means, for example, the number of risk factors, the number of portfolios that are covered, etc. 


52 
Note that the set of risk factors should include all underlying risk factors/drivers that are integrated into 
the IMM exposure model (not differentiating between whether risk factors are directly or implicitly 
diffused). 


53 
It should be noted that for a sensitivity-based approach, coverage ratios by asset class only (such as 
interest rate, foreign exchange, equity, etc.) are sufficient. 



(c) institutions should be able to provide an explanation justifying the level of 
the respective coverage ratio. 


Such coverage ratios should form part of the back-testing reports to ensure that 
the scope of the back-testing is transparent. 


Furthermore, it is the ECB’s understanding that in order to comply with the 
representativeness requirements stated in Article 
294(1)(h) of the CRR, SFTs 
should be included in the back-testing samples if they are within the IMM scope. 


77. The ECB considers that statistical tests used for back-testing should be 
adapted when back-testing samples contain forecasts over fully or partially 
overlapping time periods54 (compared with standard versions of statistical tools 
applicable for the case of non-overlapping forecasts) to account for 
dependencies in the sample and therefore serve as a proper indicator of the 
model performance. In the view of the ECB, this practice would avoid the risk of 
being in breach of Article 
294(1)(j) of the CRR. 
78. Where back-testing relies only on IMM pricing functions for both predictions and 
realisations (i.e. 
realised prices derived from benchmarking systems are not 
taken into account), the attention given to the assessment of the adequacy of 
IMM pricing functions (as provided for by Article 
294(1)(e) and (l) of the CRR) is 
seen to be even more important. Consequently, in the view of the ECB, 
institutions should strengthen their validation/review of IMM pricing functions 
accordingly. 
79. In order to ensure appropriate back-testing practices as required by 
Article 
294(1)(j) of the CRR, the ECB sees it as good practice to pay special 
attention to the consistency of predictions and realisations in the case of actual 
portfolio back-testing; in other words, changes of the portfolio composition 
during the observation period (e.g. 
due to new or closed-out transactions) 
should be handled accordingly. 
80. In accordance with Article 
294(1)(c), (e) and (g) of the CRR as understood by 
the ECB in paragraphs 
74 and 75 of this chapter, the ECB sees benefit in back-
testing different relevant risk measures, including the market value55 at 
transaction level, the market value of netting sets56 as well as the exposure57 at 
netting set level. 
(a) Market value corrections resulting from the application of paragraph 
14 of 
this chapter are considered to be part of the IMM and should hence be 
reflected in the back-testing framework. Therefore, such corrections should 
be taken into account when performing back-testing both on the level of 





54 
For instance, distinct variables over the same forecasting period are tested simultaneously or tests are 
built on a single variable and different successive but overlapping observation periods. 


55 
Market values can be either positive or negative. 


56 
This means the sum of all transaction market values within that netting set. This sum can be positive or 
negative. 


57 
Exposure should always take into account the collateral balance and the margin mechanism. In the 
case of unmargined netting sets, the collateral is zero. Combining the provisions of Article 
272(14) and 
(17) of the CRR, exposure is understood as an inherently non-negative value. 



predictions and on the level of realisations, if the latter are calculated using 
the IMM pricing functions. Regarding predictions, the ECB considers it 
good practice for an institution to complement this approach with an 
additional back-testing run that does not take into account the market 
value corrections in the predictions. Regarding realisations, either the 
market value with correction or the market value coming directly from a 
benchmarking system can be used. In cases where the comparison of 
these back-testing runs shows significantly different results, the institution 
should investigate the root cause of these differences to support the 
validation of the market value corrections. 
(a) The ECB understands Article 
294(1)(o) of the CRR as requiring a 
validation of the identification process for significant price differences (see 
paragraph 
12) as well as a corresponding full analysis of these differences 
and their root causes. 
(b) The action taken to address the inaccuracy of the model in accordance 
with Article 
294(1)(d) of the CRR, including price corrections also for future 
grid points in accordance with paragraph 
14, should be validated.58 
(a) The model-estimated collateral balance at 𝑡0 is benchmarked against the 
actual collateral balance at 𝑡0, if applicable (see paragraph 
36). 
(b) Institutions benchmark the IM (see paragraph 
46). 



(b) If direct back-testing of the exposure of margined netting sets is not 
feasible, institutions should have a separate validation of the margining 
process, of collateral value changes and of netting set market value 
changes over the relevant time horizons. 


81. In order to reduce the risk of breaching Article 
292(1)(a) and (g) of the CRR and 
based on the requirements of Article 
294(1)(l) of the CRR, institutions should 
compare the values of pricing functions used for revaluation under the IMM with 
values from a benchmarking system on a regular basis. 
82. The ECB considers it compliant with Article 
292(1)(b) and (g) of the CRR when 
the following benchmark comparisons are conducted: 


58 
The validation for future grid points may consider market data scenarios deviating significantly from 𝑡0 
and potential changes in sign and absolute value of the detected price difference. 


A full analysis of the differences detected, their root causes and the action taken 
to address the inaccuracy of the model should be conducted regularly in order 
to reduce the risk of breaching Article 
294(1)(d) and (o) of the CRR. 


83. For the purposes of Article 
294(1)(e), (l) and (o) of the CRR, in accordance with 
the understanding of the ECB described in paragraph 
17 and in addition to 
paragraph 
81, the ECB views it to be best practice if institutions assess the 
following within their validation framework. 



(a) Whether deviations from a full simulation59 are documented and justified. 
(b) Whether the effect of using approximated pricing functions instead of those 
from any reliable benchmarking system is not significant. 
(c) Whether, for all approximated pricing functions, the value changes due to 
risk factor changes occurring in IMM simulated paths are reliable 
compared with value changes from non-approximated pricing functions 
(from any reliable benchmarking system) for the same transaction type. 
(d) If any alternative way to calculate exposures is used, the ECB considers 
that the items mentioned in paragraph 
17(b) of this chapter should also be 
met. Furthermore, validation should ensure that the respective methods 
are applied in a way that does not lead to a systematic underestimation of 
exposures compared with the full simulation (as described in paragraph 
5) 
for the transactions affected. 





59 
As described in paragraph 
5. 


(i) splitting the transactions into synthetic netting sets differentiating 
between transactions treated using the “standard” IMM calculation 
and those where exposures are calculated in an alternative way; 
(ii) carving-out the affected transactions into a standardised method. 


In the ECB’s understanding, transactions treated with alternative exposure 
calculation methods should also be included in the back-testing 
framework. In order to fulfil the requirements of Article 
294(1)(o) of the 
CRR, the ECB sees it as beneficial to also analyse affected transactions 
separately rather than mixing effects when back-testing is only conducted 
at actual portfolio level. 


In addition, the netting benefits (numerical impact) when using any type of 
alternative method to calculate exposures in the IMM should be assessed 
by comparing the resulting exposure with those obtained after: 


11 Effective expected positive exposure 


84. This section refers to the normalisation of the weights Δ𝑡𝑘 that are used in the 
calculation formula for the EEPE. 



11.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 41 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/201360 

284 

(6) 



60 
See corrigendum to the CRR of 25 
January 2017. 


 


85. The regulatory provision relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
requires further guidance is the calculation formula for the EEPE, which 
appears in Article 
284(6) of the CRR. 
86. The corrigendum of 25 January 2017 amends the formula in Article 
284(6) of 
the CRR by dividing the weighted sum of the Effective EEs by the applicable 
time horizon (1 year or the maturity of the longest-dated transaction belonging 
to a netting set if this is below 1 year): 


𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝐸𝑃𝐸=
1
𝑚𝑖𝑛{1 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟,𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦}
∙Σ𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝐸𝐸𝑡𝑘Δ𝑡𝑘
𝑚𝑖𝑛{1 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟,𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦}
𝑘=1 


However, the units of the weights Δ𝑡𝑘 and 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 still need to be defined. 


11.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


87. In the understanding of the ECB, Article 
284(6) of the CRR should be 
understood as requiring that the weights Δ𝑡𝑘 and the parameter 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 are 
expressed in units of one year. 


12 Alpha parameter 


88. The alpha multiplier affects all netting sets and thus all counterparties and 
should be considered as intending to capture extra risk arising, for example, 
from the fact that exposures are correlated with credit drivers (e.g. 
PD, LGD) 
and to address general deficiencies in the IMM framework. Alpha is the only 
parameter besides capital buffers that can be increased explicitly to account for 
such deficiencies. 



12.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 42 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

284 

(4) 

293 

(1), (2) 



 


89. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following: 
(a) Article 
284(4) of the CRR defines the exposure value as the product of 
alpha and the EEPE with “α = 1.4, unless competent authorities require a 
higher α or permit institutions to use their own estimates in accordance 
with paragraph 
9 [of Article 
284 of the CRR]”; 
(b) Article 
293(2) of the CRR, based on Article 
284(4) of the CRR, links the 
level61 of the supervisory alpha setting to the degree with which the 
institution meets the requirements for the risk management system as set 
out in Article 
293(1) of the CRR; 
(c) Article 
293(1) of the CRR refers in particular to overall validation, adequate 
processes, integration into the day-to-day risk management process and 
limit utilisation (use test), documentation and independent reviews. 





61 
This refers to levels higher than the floor value of 1.4 for the non-modelled and 1.2 for the modelled 
alpha parameter in accordance with Article 
284(4) and (9) of the CRR. 


12.2 Supervisory actions 


90. In accordance with Article 
284(4) of the CRR, the ECB can increase the alpha 
parameter in a proportionate and appropriate way for either an interim or an 
undefined period to address model, risk management or governance 
deficiencies identified by the ECB. In particular, targeted deficiencies may 
include (i) model deficiencies, which lead or may lead to an underestimation of 
the EEPE as defined in Article 
284(5) and (6) of the CRR and Article 
285 of the 
CRR for margined trading, or (ii) deficiencies in the validation framework. 
(a) both supervisory alpha increases related to an interim period and those 
related to an undefined period require explicit supervisory decisions; 
(b) if alpha is increased for an interim period, the decision will specify the 
length of the interim period or the condition when it ends. 





It should be noted that: 



91. The ECB can base the amount of a potential alpha increase above the floor 
values to the extent possible on an available impact analysis. 
(a) The analysis assesses62 the impact on the EEPE as calculated without the 
identified model deficiency. 





62 
This assessment can also include less precise estimations, where needed. 


(b) Counterparty credit risk glossary). 
(c) Some non-exhaustive examples of how identified model deficiencies can 
increase alpha are discussed in this document (see for example 
paragraphs 
21, 0 and 0), where the general alpha increase (applied to all 
netting sets) reflects whether the identified deficiencies possibly affect only 
a part of the netting sets (e.g. 
only the margined ones). 
(d) The ECB considers that increases should be in multiples of half a decimal 
point. For example, if alpha = 1.4, alpha becomes at least 1.45 if an 
increase is deemed necessary. 


As this deficiency is obviously related to the standard configuration of the IMM, which contains this deficiency, an impact calculation 
based only on a subset of the relevant portfolio could be accepted for this purpose. This calculation can be performed in a well-defined 
developer area for representative sub-portfolios (as defined in the 


If no impact calculations are available, the ECB may estimate the amount of the 
alpha increase in a conservative way using all other available information. 


13 Risks not in effective expected positive exposure 


92. Depending on the set-up of the IMM and the nature of the transactions, some 
quantifiable risks may not be captured, or may not be adequately captured, by 
the IMM. This section refers to processes for identifying, monitoring and 
capitalising such risks. 



13.1 Relevant regulatory references 


Table 43 


 

Date of issue 

Article 

Paragraph/Point 

Legal background 

 

 

 

CRR 

26/06/2013 

92 

(3)(f) 

430(1) 

 

284 

(1)(a), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8) 

287 

(2) 

290 

 

292 

(1)(g), (2)-(5), (6), (7) 

293 

(1)(a), (b), (c) 

294 

(1)(d), (g), (k), (m), (n) 

368 

(1)(b), (e), (f), (2)(d) 



 


93. The regulatory provisions relating to the topic addressed in this section that 
require further guidance are the following. 
(a) Article 
92(3)(f) of the CRR specifies the types of transactions and 
agreements to be included in the calculation of the risk-weighted exposure 
amounts for the CCR. 
(b) Article 
430(1) of the CRR in conjunction with Article 
5(1) of the 
Commission Implementing Regulation on supervisory reporting requires 
institutions to report the information relating to own funds requirements 
with a quarterly frequency. 
(c) Article 
284(1)(a) of the CRR requires that the model used by the institution 
specify the forecasting distribution for changes in the market value of the 
netting set attributable to joint changes in relevant market variables such 
as interest rates and foreign exchange rates. 
(d) Article 
284(3) of the CRR requires the own funds requirement for CCR 
exposures under the IMM to be the higher of (a) the own funds 
requirement for those exposures calculated on the basis of EEPE using 
current market data, and (b) the own funds requirement for those 
exposures calculated on the basis of EEPE using a single consistent 
stress calibration for all CCR exposures to which the IMM is applied. 
(e) Article 
284(4) to (6) of the CRR describes the way the exposure value is 
calculated based on EEPE. 
(f) Article 
284(8) of the CRR allows institutions to use a measure of the 
distribution calculated by the IMM that is more conservative than  
multiplied by EEPE as calculated in accordance with the equation in 
Article 
284(4) for every counterparty. 






(g) In accordance with Article 
287(2) of the CRR, the independent risk control 
unit is responsible for the design and implementation of its CCR 
management, including the initial and ongoing validation of the model. 
Specifically, under Article 
287(2) of the same regulation(c), the 
independent risk control must control input data integrity and produce and 
analyse reports on the output of the institution's risk measurement model, 
including an evaluation of the relationship between measures of risk 
exposure and credit and trading limits. 
(h) Article 
290 of the CRR describes the requirements for the stress testing 
programme. Specifically, Article 
290(9) of the same regulation requires the 
results of the stress testing to be regularly reported to senior management, 
at least on a quarterly basis. The reports and analysis of the results must 
cover the largest counterparty-level impacts across the portfolio, material 
concentrations within segments of the portfolio (within the same industry or 
region), and relevant portfolio and counterparty specific trends. 
(i) In accordance with Article 
292(1)(g) of the CRR, institutions must ensure 
the integrity of the modelling process by adopting a certain number of 
measures including processes for formal reconciliation between the model 
and source data systems to verify on an ongoing basis that transaction 
terms and specifications are being reflected in EPE correctly or at least 
conservatively. 
(j) Article 
292(2) to (5) of the CRR describes requirements for the calibration 
of the IMM using current and stressed market data. 
(k) In accordance with Article 
292(6) of the CRR, institutions must subject the 
model to a validation process that is clearly formulated in their policies and 
procedures. 
(l) In accordance with Article 
292(7) of the CRR, institutions must monitor 
relevant risks such as their exposures to specific wrong-way risk and 
general wrong-way risk, their exposures with a rising risk profile after one 
year and their exposures with a residual maturity below one year. 
(m) In accordance with Article 
293(1)(a) of the CRR, institutions must meet the 
qualitative requirements set out in Part Three, Title IV, Chapter 5 of the 
CRR, including the qualitative requirements set in Article 
368 of the CRR 
for the use of internal models for market risk. 
(n) In accordance with Article 
293(1)(b) and (c) of the CRR, institutions must 
conduct a regular programme of back-testing and carry out an initial 
validation and ongoing periodic reviews of their CCR exposure models and 
the risk measures generated by them. 
(o) In accordance with Article 
294(1)(d) of the CRR, if the model validation 
indicates that EEPE is underestimated, institutions must take the action 
necessary to address the inaccuracy of the model. 






(p) Article 
294(1)(g) of the CRR requires institutions to validate that the CCR 
exposure model includes transaction-specific information to capture the 
effects of margining and that it accounts for the nature of margin 
agreements. 
(q) Article 
294(1)(k) of the CRR requires institutions to validate their CCR 
exposure models and all risk measures out to time horizons 
commensurate with the maturity of trades. 
(r) Article 
294(1)(m) of the CRR requires that the validation of an institution's 
CCR exposure model and its relevant risk measures include an 
assessment of the adequacy of the recent performance. 
(s) Article 
294(1)(n) of the CRR requires institutions to assess the frequency 
with which the parameters of an CCR exposure model are updated as part 
of the initial and ongoing validation process. 
(t) Article 
294(1)(o) of the CRR requires that the initial and ongoing validation 
of CCR exposure models assess whether or not the counterparty level and 
netting set exposure calculations of exposure are appropriate. 
(u) In accordance with Article 
368(1)(b) of the CRR, institutions must have a 
risk control unit that is independent from business trading units and reports 
directly to senior management, being responsible for designing and 
implementing any internal model. The unit must conduct the initial and 
ongoing validation, being responsible for the overall risk management 
system. 
(v) In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, institutions must have in 
place established procedures for monitoring and ensuring compliance with 
a documented set of internal policies and controls concerning the overall 
operation of its internal models. 
(w) In accordance with Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR, any internal must have a 
proven track record of reasonable accuracy in measuring risks. 
(x) In accordance with Article 
368(1)(h) of the CRR, institutions must conduct 
an independent review of their internal models as part of their regular 
internal auditing process. 
(y) In accordance with Article 
368(2)(d) of the CRR, the review mentioned in 
Article 
368(1)(h) of the CRR must be conducted at least once a year and 
must consider various elements, including the scope of risks captured by 
the risk measurement model. 






13.2 Principles for ECB Banking Supervision 


13.2.1 Framework 


94. “Risks not in effective expected positive exposure” (RNIEPE) are those risks 
inside the IMM which are not yet part of the EEPE or not adequately captured in 
EEPE and hence are not included in the IMM exposure value defined in 
Article 
284(4) of the CRR. 


Based on the provisions referred to above, the ECB considers that the 
processes, methods and governance set out in this section for RNIEPE are an 
integral part of the overall processes and general internal governance of the 
IMM for CCR. Therefore, the ECB considers it good practice for institutions to 
have policies and controls relating to RNIEPE (hereinafter referred to as the 
“RNIEPE framework”). The elements of the RNIEPE framework are set out in 
detail in following paragraphs. 


95. The RNIEPE framework should comprise guidance for identification and 
quantification, which may also include capitalisation of certain RNIEPE, 
monitoring, management and reporting of RNIEPE, and all related governance 
arrangements. 
96. An “RNIEPE add-on” is part of the RNIEPE framework and is understood as a 
temporary risk analogue to an exposure amount63 until the corresponding 
RNIEPE is incorporated into the EEPE in a manner compliant with the 
regulatory requirements of the IMM as provided for in Article 
284(6) of the 
CRR.64 As such, the ECB considers that RNIEPE add-ons are not part of the 
EEPE itself and are therefore not included in the exposure value calculated in 
accordance with Article 
284(4) of the CRR.65 The ECB expects these RNIEPE 
add-ons to result in risk exposure amounts66 in line with paragraph 
105 of this 
chapter.67 


63 
The precise meaning of “temporary” in this context needs to be agreed with the supervisor and 
depends on the specific RNIEPE. For the RNIEPE add-on calculated in accordance with 
paragraph 
109(b), it refers to the time until EU legislation refines the IMM provisions including the 
treatment of exposure spikes in margined trading. 


64 
The quantification of the RNIEPE requires a flooring at zero. Institutions would need to include the 
underlying risk in the EEPE to benefit from potential exposure offsetting. 


65 
If the exposure value is calculated in accordance with Article 
284(8) of the CRR, no RNIEPE add-on is 
expected by the ECB, i.e. all modelling components of the IMM, including additional or conservative 
elements, are expected to be part of the exposure metric under Article 
284(8) of the CRR. Since the 
RNIEPE framework is seen as an integral part of the overall processes in the IMM, no additional or 
parallel capitalisation is proposed using any of the methods in Sections 
3 to 5 of Part 
Three, Title 
II, 
Chapter 
6 of the CRR. 


66 
Risk exposure amounts as defined in Article 
92(3) and (4) of the CRR. 


67 
To be reported in COREP as “Additional risk exposure amount due to Article 
3 CRR” (COREP 
C02.00 
Row 760, Column 010) together with any other own-initiative capital buffers. See also paragraph 
105 of 
this chapter on using a consistent metric/unit for insertion. 


In the view of the ECB, the RNIEPE framework should not be understood as 
covering elements for which separate provisions are provided in the regulatory 


framework for CCR, such as – but not limited to – the aspects mentioned in 
Article 
292(7)(b) of the CRR. 


97. As the RNIEPE framework is considered to be a part of the processes and 
modelling related to the IMM, it covers the same scope in terms of transactions 
as that permitted under Article 
283 of the CRR and the same risk factors as 
relevant for Article 
284(1)(a) of the CRR. 
98. In accordance with Article 
287(2) of the CRR, the risk control unit is responsible 
for the design and implementation of the institution’s CCR management. 
Because the RNIEPE framework is seen as an integral part of the IMM, the 
ECB considers that the risk control unit is also responsible for the overall 
RNIEPE framework. 
99. In accordance with Article 
287(2) of the CRR, the RNIEPE framework and 
methodologies should be subject to validation and independent review, as set 
out in further detail in Article 
294(1)(d), (g), (k), (m), (n) and (o) of the CRR and 
Article 
288 of the CRR respectively. In this context and where applicable, back-
testing of RNIEPE add-ons is seen as beneficial. 
100. In order to enable efficient monitoring of RNIEPE for the purpose of internal 
modelling as referred to in Article 
368(1)(e) of the CRR, the ECB considers that 
the policies of the RNIEPE framework should be documented and should 
include: 
(a) descriptions of each RNIEPE with a justification as to why any identified 
RNIEPE is not directly included in the EEPE calculation; 
(b) the different tasks and responsibilities, and the frequency of their 
execution. 





13.2.2 Identification 


101. A single identified RNIEPE refers to a distinct risk not accurately captured in or 
fully omitted from the calculation of EEPE. This can refer, for example, to one 
specific risk factor or a set of risk factors (e.g. related to a yield curve), or to an 
element missing from the margining mechanism or other model assumptions. 
(a) A single risk factor, a set of risk factors or the dependency structure 
(correlations) of a subset of risk factors that cannot be modelled precisely 
enough to allow for the modelling of the joint distribution under 
Article 
284(1)(a) of the CRR, for instance because of: 
(i) a different stochastic dynamic (e.g. due a partially effective pegging 
mechanism for a subset of FX rates); 








The ECB considers that RNIEPE can emerge as a result of specific 
circumstances, including the following. 


(ii) in the case of historical calibration, the underlying time series 
containing too many proxies; 
(iii) the occurrence of risk factor jumps that are not frequent enough to 
allow for an appropriate calibration; 
(iv) insufficient observations of basis risks. 



(b) Processes in place that do not allow the modelling of a margin 
arrangement to reflect correctly or conservatively enough all the relevant 
terms and specifications required by Article 
292(1)(g) of the CRR. 
(c) Cash flows that would be paid to a defaulting counterparty in margined 
trading and that are not, or not fully, reflected in exposures underlying the 
EEPE owing to the DMP or owing to the legal requirements of the contract. 
(a) treatment of synthetic netting sets arising from the application of 
paragraph 
10 of this chapter; 
(b) deficiencies in pricing models at transaction level for which paragraphs 
12 
to 16 of this chapter apply; 
(c) corrected transaction values arising from the application of paragraph 
14 
of this chapter; 
(d) all cases where a full simulation is missing, as listed in paragraph 
17 of 
this chapter. 





102. The ECB considers that the following shortcomings should be treated in EEPE 
rather than in RNIEPE, unless duly justified: 


The concept of RNIEPE should not affect potentially existing approaches to 
modelling specific parameters or modelling features that use a sufficient degree 
of conservatism68 in dealing with uncertainty in the EEPE. Therefore, the ECB 
does not see a need to separate the effects of such parameters and modelling 
features from EEPE and include them in RNIEPE. However, the ECB expects 
such parameters or modelling features affecting EEPE to be clearly 
documented, monitored and reported as part of the processes of the IMM. 


68 
This refers for example to diffusion parameters leading to greater variation in simulated risk factors than 
would be observed from historical data, or simplifications of margin arrangements that do not lead to a 
systematic underestimation of exposures. 


103. In order to properly monitor each RNIEPE, the ECB considers that institutions 
should explain in their documentation how each RNIEPE is identified and 
defined. In order to properly assess materiality, the ECB considers that the 
current portfolio composition and trading strategy of the institution should be 
taken into account when assessing each RNIEPE. 



The ECB considers it best practice for an RNIEPE that is substantial in the 
current portfolio to be subject to an RNIEPE add-on, even if this RNIEPE might 
cease to be substantial at a later point in time. 


104. The ECB considers that in order to ensure an accurate capture of risks, 
institutions should strive to identify and monitor69 RNIEPE on a regular basis as 
part of the overall risk management framework. The ECB considers it best 
practice to use existing processes efficiently to identify RNIEPE. 


69 
Monitoring should be applied in particular to frequently or permanently occurring RNIEPE in line with 
paragraphs 
100 and 115 of this chapter. 


(a) initial and ongoing internal validation of the IMM, as referred to in 
Articles 
287(2), 292(6), 293(1)(b) and (c), and 294 of the CRR; 
(b) back-testing as referred to in Article 
294 of the CRR; 
(c) controls of input data integrity as referred to in Article 
287(2)(c) of the 
CRR; 
(d) with regard to the approval of new products, analysing whether the 
characteristics inherent in the new products can be adequately captured 
by the IMM in order to ensure that these new products are fully compatible 
with the comprehensive risk control and validation by the risk control unit, 
as required by Article 
368(1)(b) of the CRR; 
(e) stress testing as referred to in Article 
290 of the CRR. 


As part of such best practice, and in order to maximise efficiency, institutions 
should, as a minimum, use the following processes to identify RNIEPE: 

In accordance with Article 
368(2)(d) of the CRR, the annual review of an 
institution’s overall risk management process must consider the scope of risks 
captured by the risk measurement model. Therefore, the ECB considers that a 
review and, if necessary, an update of the RNIEPE inventory should be carried 
out at least once a year. 


13.2.3 Quantifications 


105. As identified RNIEPE are considered to be part of the IMM, the quantification of 
each RNIEPE should (to the extent possible) be methodologically similar to the 
respective exposure quantification in the IMM, reflecting either an expected 
exposure averaged over one year or an increment to an EEPE, taking relevant 
stress calibrations (as set out in Articles 
284(3)(b) and 292(2) to (5) of the CRR) 
into account where applicable. This would imply that two quantifications are not 
necessary in cases where the expected RNIEPE exposures (EREs) according 
to the current calibration and the stress calibration are very similar. 



The quantification of EREs is set out in further detail in the paragraphs below. 
Each individual ERE should be floored at zero. 


It is the ECB’s understanding that for each RNIEPE add-on70, the 
corresponding risk exposure amount should be calculated as 
𝑅𝑊𝐴𝑅𝑁𝐼𝐸𝑃𝐸=𝑅𝑊∙𝛼∙𝐸𝑅𝐸, 


70 
As set out in paragraph 
96 of this chapter, a substantial RNIEPE add-on constitutes an additional 
exposure that should be capitalised in accordance with Article 
3 of the CRR. 


71 
The A-IRB risk weights depend in general on netting sets and may even depend on a single netting set 
for one counterparty owing to the maturity adjustment. 


where 𝑅𝑊 denotes the risk weight as defined in Part 
III, Title 
2, Chapter 
2, 
Sections 
2 and 3 of the CRR for SA and Part 
III, Title 
2, Chapter 
3, Sections 
2 to 
4 of the CRR for IRB and 𝛼 corresponds to the alpha parameter under 
Article 
284(4) of the CRR, including potential increases as outlined in 
paragraph 
90 of this chapter. Note that the RNIEPE add-on equals 𝑅𝑊∙𝛼∙𝐸𝑅𝐸 
in cases where the ERE is substantial (as defined in paragraph 
117 below). 


106. The value of the risk weight referred to in paragraph 
105 above may depend on 
how many counterparties are affected by a given RNIEPE. 
(a) If the ERE related to a given RNIEPE can be calculated per netting set, 
the risk weight(s)71 applied should be the same as that taken for the 
exposure value for the respective netting set as referred to in Article 
284(4) 
of the CRR, regardless of whether a standardised risk weight or an IRB 
approach is applied for the calculation of own funds requirements 
according to Article 
92(3)(f) of the CRR. Thus, the risk exposure amount 
should be calculated as 
(b) Alternatively, if the ERE is calculated simultaneously across several netting 
sets (i.e. no calculation of a single 𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑛 is possible), it is recommended 
that institutions follow one of the following two approaches: 
(i) apply one risk weight to all affected counterparties or nettings sets 
being as high as the highest risk weight of the set of affected 
counterparties or netting sets: 
(ii) apply an average risk weight to all affected counterparties or netting 
sets, which takes the relative materiality of exposures into account 








𝑅𝑊𝐴𝑅𝑁𝐼𝐸𝑃𝐸=Σ𝑅𝑊𝑛∙𝛼∙𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑛
𝑛 
, 


where 𝑅𝑊𝑛 denotes the risk weight corresponding to the n-th netting set 
affected by RNIEPE, and 𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑛 the corresponding expected RNIEPE 
exposure. 


𝑅𝑊𝐴𝑅𝑁𝐼𝐸𝑃𝐸=𝑅𝑊∙𝛼∙𝐸𝑅𝐸, 


where 𝑅𝑊=max
𝑛
{𝑅𝑊𝑛 for affected counterparties 𝑛=1,…,𝑁}; 



and does not systematically underestimate risk weights, provided the 
methodology of averaging is justified and internally validated. 



(a) Because the quantification of the impact should allow the different RNIEPE 
to be assessed individually, no diversification effect should be applied 
between different RNIEPE when quantifying an individual RNIEPE. 
(b) Where an RNIEPE affects only parts of a netting set, the RNIEPE should 
be quantified based on the affected transactions only, not taking into 
account netting effects between these transactions and the rest of the 
netting set. For the purposes of capital allocation, the RNIEPE add-on 
should be allocated to the risk exposure amount of the original netting set. 
(a) The baseline is the EEPE based on the same transactions and netting 
sets as used in production (without any RNIEPE add-ons). 
(b) Where the RNIEPE does not depend on the stress calibration and is 
incorporated into one EEPE according to (a) above, either the difference 
between that EEPE and the current EEPE, or the difference between that 
EEPE and the stressed EEPE, whichever is higher, should be used. 
Alternatively, two incremental measures can be calculated, one stressed, 
one current, in line with paragraph 
105 of this chapter, and the higher of 
the two should be taken into account. 
(c) The incremental exposure can be any positive or negative number. The 
calculation of the incremental exposure may result in a negative number if 
the incorporation of the RNIEPE has a risk-reducing effect. In that case, 
and in line with paragraph 
105, the incremental exposure is set to zero for 
the respective netting set. 
(d) The quantification of the impact should be as accurate as possible using 
reasonable effort. Therefore, the ECB understands that the impact 
estimation methodology can use appropriate approximations, 
assumptions, expert judgement or a stress methodology. Any such 
approximations, assumptions or expert judgement should be duly justified 
and documented. 





107. In accordance with Article 
368(1)(e) and (f) of the CRR, the ECB considers it 
good practice for institutions to quantify RNIEPE in an appropriate way and to 
document and duly justify the methodology applied, in order to assess the need 
to incorporate the RNIEPE into EEPE. 
108. The ECB considers it best practice that for each RNIEPE identified, the 
quantification of the impact of the ERE is estimated based on the resulting 
(incremental72) exposure when the RNIEPE is incorporated into EEPE as 
follows. 


72 
See footnote 
85 regarding incremental risk numbers in the market risk chapter. 



109. The ECB considers that a prudent impact quantification differing from that 
described in paragraph 
108 above could be used where this is duly justified. 
Where using an RNIEPE is justified but an appropriate impact quantification 
using an incremental exposure cannot be performed for this RNIEPE, the ECB 
considers it a prudent approach to perform an estimation of the impact of a 
RNIEPE based on an exposure calculation outside the EEPE where the 
RNIEPE is the only source of risks. 
(a) For this stand-alone impact estimation of ERE, the institution should 
demonstrate that it does not systematically underestimate the incremental 
exposure or that the calculation of the incremental exposure is misleading. 
(b) Where trade-related cash flows may be missing from the EEPE calculation 
as discussed in the case of margined trading in paragraph 
20 of this 
chapter, the ECB expects the following method to be applied to account for 
such cash flows when calculating ERE in the RNIEPE add-on: 
(i) The ERE for one netting set is given by the formula: 
(ii) The term 𝐸𝑆𝐸𝑡𝑘, the expected spike exposure, is calculated as the 
expected exposure increase due to trade-related cash flow payments 
from the institution to the defaulting counterparty during the MPOR 
attached to the time grid point 𝑡𝑘 which are not included in the EEPE, 
and which are possible due to: 
(iii) The term Δ𝑡𝑘 denotes the time period inside the MPOR during which 
the cash flow payments described in point (ii) above are possible. 
The term is expressed in units of a year and has the same meaning 
as the Δ𝑡𝑘 in Article 
284(6) of the CRR. 








𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑒=
1
𝑚𝑖𝑛{1 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟,𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦}
∙Σ𝐸𝑆𝐸𝑡𝑘∙Δ𝑡𝑘
𝑚𝑖𝑛{1 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟,𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦}
𝑘=1 
. 

(ii.a) contractual provisions (e.g. grace periods) as outlined in 
paragraph 20(b)(ii) of this chapter; 
(ii.b) the default notification and management processes of the 
institution as outlined in paragraphs 20(b)(i) and (c) of this 
chapter; 
(ii.c) applicable settlement netting rules for such cash flows as 
mentioned in paragraph 20(d) of this chapter, which can also 
include variation margin payments if contractually agreed. 
110. The ECB considers that in order to ensure that the quantification of RNIEPE is 
appropriately accurate in accordance with Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR, the 
quantification should, where possible, make use of objective market data. 
Where the quality of the data used is insufficient, the institution should be aware 
of the effect this might have on the quantification of the respective RNIEPE and, 



if necessary, take measures to mitigate the effect. This should also be part of 
the documentation of the respective RNIEPE. 
111. In order to ensure alignment with the EEPE, when quantifying an RNIEPE the 
calibration methodology for the ERE should be based on the same 
methodology as used for the EEPE. For example, it should be based on the 
same observation period if the EEPE is based on historical calibration. Any 
differences should be duly justified. If scarce data are used for calibration, they 
should be used in a way that avoids a systematic underestimation of exposure. 
This may involve relying to some extent on expert judgement, which should be 
well documented and explained. 


13.2.4 Management of RNIEPE 


112. As mentioned previously, the identification, quantification and management of 
the RNIEPE should be integrated into the CCR management framework. The 
ECB therefore considers that in order to ensure that ongoing risk measurement 
is accurate according to Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR, the risk control unit should 
carry out regular impact quantification and monitoring of all RNIEPE. The 
outcome should be reported to the relevant stakeholders in line with the 
processes set out in the institution’s RNIEPE framework. 
113. In accordance with Article 
430 of the CRR in conjunction with Article 
5(1) of the 
Commission Implementing Regulation on supervisory reporting, institutions 
must submit the information relating to own funds requirements with a quarterly 
frequency. Therefore, the ECB considers that in order to assess the adequacy 
of own funds, institutions should quantify and monitor the RNIEPE and adjust 
their scope on a regular basis and should update the RNIEPE at least quarterly. 
114. More particularly, regarding the requirement under Article 
368(1)(f) of the CRR 
that internal models should have a proven track record of reasonable accuracy 
in measuring risk, the ECB considers it a good practice for institutions to 
determine thresholds for treating individual and combined RNIEPE as part of 
their RNIEPE management. Such thresholds are based on the ratio of the ERE 
as defined in paragraph 
105 of this chapter over the EEPE, in which regard no 
RNIEPE are to be included in the denominators of the following ratios. 
(a) For a single 𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑖 of type i as described in paragraphs 
108 and 109 of this 
chapter relating to one netting set, the ratio used for determining whether 
an RNIEPE is substantial is calculated as follows: 
(b) If one 𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑖 relates, for example, to a non-modelled risk factor in the IMM 
that affects a number of netting sets or counterparties (overall N netting 
sets), the ratio used for determining whether an RNIEPE is substantial is 
calculated as follows: 





𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑖=
𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑖
𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸 
. 



(c) Regarding all 𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑖, except the ERE on exposure spikes, the ratio used to 
determine if RNIEPE should be included in EEPE for overall 𝑁 netting 
sets affected by RNIEPE type 𝑖 and 𝑀 netting sets in the overall IMM 
scope should be: 
(d) For the ERE associated with exposures spikes in a netting set 𝑛 as 
described in paragraph 
109(b) above, the ratio used to determine whether 
this RNIEPE should be included in EEPE is given (using the notation of 
the above point (c)) by: 





𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑖
𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑡=
Σ𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑖
𝑛𝑁𝑛
=1
Σ𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑛
𝑁𝑛
=1 
. 


𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜=
ΣΣ𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑖
𝑛𝑁𝑛
=1
𝐼𝑖
=1
Σ𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑚
𝑀
𝑚=1 
, 


where I denotes the overall number of RNIEPE types different from the 
RNIEPE related to spikes. 


𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑒=
Σ𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑒
𝑛𝑁𝑛
=1
Σ𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑚
𝑀
𝑚=1 
. 


115. Regarding RNIEPE that are identified as not being substantial according to one 
of the processes described in paragraph 
104 of this chapter, the ECB 
recommends that institutions either define quantitative thresholds using the 
above or similar metrics or define qualitative methodological criteria to identify 
RNIEPE that are not substantial but require at least the monitoring described in 
paragraph 
100 of this chapter. 
116. The thresholds on the ratios (a) to (d) described in paragraph 
114 above should 
include at least: 
(a) a threshold on the ratios (a) and (b) above which individual RNIEPE are 
considered as substantial and capitalised with RNIEPE add-ons as 
recommended in paragraph 
105; 
(b) a (higher) threshold on ratios (a) and (b) above which individual RNIEPE 
are to be included in the EEPE calculation in accordance with 
Article 
284(4) of the CRR, in which regard additional qualitative criteria 
possibly defined by the institution could also lead to an inclusion in EEPE, 
even if the quantitative threshold is not breached; 
(c) a threshold on ratio (c) above which one or more RNIEPE are to be 
included in the EEPE calculation in accordance with Article 
284(4) of the 
CRR so that the sum of the remaining RNIEPE leads to a ratio (c) below 
this threshold73; 





73 
This also takes the scheduling into account as discussed in footnote 63 on how long a RNIEPE might 
stay outside EEPE. 



(d) a threshold on ratio (d) above which the RNIEPE related to the exposure 
spikes need to be included into the EEPE calculation in accordance with 
Article 
284(4) of the CRR. 


117. Institutions should determine at their own discretion thresholds for assessing 
the impact of individual RNIEPE above which an individual RNIEPE is 
considered a substantial RNIEPE in the sense of paragraph 
116(a) or (b) of this 
chapter. 


However, the ECB considers that if a single RNIEPE already has a 5% impact, 
the EEPE might not capture accurately all relevant risks. Therefore, the ECB 
considers it best practice for a single RNIEPE to be considered substantial if the 
impact quantification according to paragraph 
114(a) or (b) of this chapter 
corresponds to more than 5% of the amount given by the EEPE. 


118. Institutions should determine, at their own discretion, a threshold on the ratio 
defined in paragraph 
114(c) above which RNIEPE are incorporated into EEPE. 


However, the ECB considers that if the cumulative RNIEPE impact across all 
RNIEPE types corresponds to more than 10% without the impact due to 
exposure spikes calculated as defined in paragraph 
109(b) of this chapter, of 
the amount given by EEPE of the IMM using the ratio set out in 
paragraph 
114(c) of this chapter, the EEPE might not capture accurately all 
material risks, because in accordance with Article 
7a(1)(c)(ii) of the Commission 
Delegated Regulation on materiality of extensions and changes of the IMA, a 
change of 10% or more of a relevant market risk number is to be considered a 
material change to the IMA. Therefore, and in the absence of RTS for CCR, the 
ECB considers, by analogy and also using this threshold for the IMM, that if the 
cumulative RNIEPE impact corresponds to more than 10% of the amount 
computed using EEPE, this indicates that the EEPE might not capture 
accurately all material risks. 


This implies that some (or all) of the RNIEPE contributing to the numerator of 
the ratio in paragraph 
114(c) of this chapter would need to be included in the 
EEPE in accordance with Article 
284(6) of the CRR, such that this ratio falls 
below 10%. 


119. Institutions should determine, at their own discretion, a threshold on the ratio 
defined in paragraph 
114(d) above which the RNIEPE associated with the 
exposure spikes as defined in paragraph 
109(b) of this chapter is incorporated 
into the EEPE in accordance with Article 
284(6) of the CRR. 


However, the ECB considers that if the impact of this RNIEPE relative to all 
netting sets in scope of the IMM corresponds to more than 10%, the risk related 
to exposure spikes should be incorporated into the EEPE. 


120. The ECB considers it a prudent approach that RNIEPE that are to be 
incorporated into the EEPE in accordance with paragraphs 
118 and 119 are 
capitalised with RNIEPE add-ons – if this is not already the case – as part of the 
implementation plan, until they are incorporated into EEPE. If the institution 



deems it convenient, the remaining RNIEPE, even if not substantial, may also 
be capitalised with RNIEPE add-ons. 
121. In order to enable monitoring of RNIEPE add-ons, the ECB can, on the basis of 
Article 
10 of the SSM Regulation, require an institution to provide an overview 
of RNIEPE add-ons in a suitable format chosen by the institution. 
122. Because the RNIEPE framework is an integral part of the overall IMM 
processes, a change to the RNIEPE framework – and in particular a change 
relating to the RNIEPE identification methodology, the impact quantification 
methodology or the RNIEPE add-on methodology – should be considered as an 
IMM model change. The ECB considers that the EGMA could provide 
appropriate guidance on assessing these changes.74 
(a) The ECB considers that changes to the RNIEPE framework should in 
general be notified ex ante to the ECB. 
(b) However, changes within the existing RNIEPE framework which do not 
need new methodologies or processes to be implemented may be notified 
to the ECB through ex post notifications only. 



123. In the view of the ECB, ceasing to capitalise an RNIEPE because ratios under 
paragraph 
114(a) and (b) of this chapter are below the thresholds set out in 
paragraph 
117, or starting to capitalise an RNIEPE with an RNIEPE add-on 
according to the thresholds of the RNIEPE framework, would not constitute a 
model change and does not need to be separately notified as a model change, 
provided that it is based on the approved methodology of the RNIEPE 
framework. 
124. The incorporation of an individual RNIEPE into EEPE, irrespective of whether it 
was previously treated as an RNIEPE add-on, and irrespective of whether it is a 
previously identified or newly identified RNIEPE, constitutes an IMM model 
change and should therefore be assessed using the EGMA. 
(a) If a change or extension of the RNIEPE framework or the incorporation of 
an individual RNIEPE into the EEPE receives the classification “ex ante” 
but is very close to the classification “material”, the individual RNIEPE or 
those RNIEPE that contribute to that materiality should be integrated into 
the EEPE. 
(b) When calculating the impacts of incorporating an RNIEPE into EEPE, the 
calculation should not take into account impacts with the opposite sign 
inside the RNIEPE framework. 



125. Because the RNIEPE add-ons are not included in EEPE, they should not be 
taken into account when back-testing the EEPE in accordance with Article 
294 
of the CRR. 


74 
It is possible that a future version of the EGMA might contain refinements regarding changes and 
extensions that are affected by the RNIEPE framework. 



Annex 


This annex outlines two examples of a technique for assessing the confidence 
interval of the estimated EEPE referred to in paragraph 0, assuming that the EEPE is 
calculated using a Monte Carlo method and a pseudo random number generator. 

In the examples, the MC error on the EEPE is defined as an aggregation of the MC 
error on the different netting sets. At netting set level, the MC error on the EEPE is 
defined as half the length of the 95% two-sided confidence interval centred around 
the sample estimated EEPE. 

Two methods are proposed for the calculation performed at the netting set level. 
These are described in the “Method 1” and “Method 2” sections. How the MC error 
should be inferred for a whole portfolio consisting of several netting sets is detailed 
below in the “Aggregation” section. 

Note that the methods below apply to banks that use a pseudo Monte Carlo 
simulation method and not to banks that apply a quasi Monte Carlo simulation 
method. In this context, a pseudo Monte Carlo simulation method is defined as a 
method that utilises a random number generator based on an algorithm creating a 
sequence of desired length N of numbers that mimic independent samples drawn 
from a uniform distribution. A quasi Monte Carlo simulation method is defined as a 
method that utilises a low-discrepancy sequence of numbers, which is 
deterministically uniformly distributed (e.g. Sobol). 

Irrespective of the numerical method implemented for its estimation of the EEPE 
(e.g. types of random number generators), the institution should provide an analysis 
as part of its validation framework demonstrating that its approach has a reasonable 
accuracy as required by Article 368(1)(f) of the CRR (as referenced by 
Article 293(1)(a) of the CRR). This analysis should include an assessment of 
convergence and an error estimation. 

In the following, “MC run” refers to a pseudo Monte Carlo simulation with N 
scenarios calculated with one particular set of random numbers. 

A.1 
Method 1 


Let 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑁(𝛼̂) denote the estimator of the EEPE for one given netting set 𝛼 
obtained from one MC run with 𝑁 simulations (e.g. 𝑁=2000). 

The institution can estimate an MC error on 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑁(𝛼̂), on the basis of a 95% 
confidence level, by using a set of several MC runs. In what follows, notations are 
simplified: 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑁(𝛼̂) is replaced by 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂; 𝛼 and 𝑁 are dropped, since the 
calculations detailed below are performed on the same netting set 𝛼 and with the 
same number of simulations per MC run, 𝑁. 


Furthermore, let 𝑚 denote the size of the set of MC runs (e.g. 𝑚=50). The different 
MC runs are obtained by running the MC simulation with different random numbers 
(e.g. by using different seeds). 

The MC error on 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ calculated with method 1 is defined as: 
𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)≔𝛷−1(0.975) ∙ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚)∙√𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)
≃1.96∙ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚)∙√𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) , 

with 

𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)≔
1
𝑚−1Σ(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑘̂−
1
𝑚
Σ𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑙̂𝑚𝑙
=1)
2
𝑚𝑘
=1; 

• 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑘̂ denoting the estimation of 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸 using the k-th run of the MC run set; 
• 𝛷−1 standing for the inverse cumulative function of a standard normal 
distribution. 


By using 𝛷−1(0.975)≈1.96, we arrive at the following error formula: 
𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)≔1.96 ∙ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚)∙√
1
𝑚−1Σ(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑘̂−
1
𝑚
Σ𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑙̂
𝑚
𝑙=1)
2𝑚
𝑘=1 


The rationale of this formula is as follows. 

If we assume that 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ follows a normal distribution, 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) can be 
interpreted as half of the length of the 95% two-sided confidence interval centred 
around 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂. More precisely, it is estimated through a three-step approach: 

1. 𝛷−1(0.975)√𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) is half of the length of the 95% two-sided confidence 
interval centred around 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂, since we have: 


𝑃(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸∈[𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂−𝛷−1(0.975)√𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂), 
𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂+𝛷−1(0.975)√𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)])=95% . 


2. √𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) being unknown, it is approximated by √𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂). The length 
of the two-sided 95% confidence interval, 𝛷−1(0.975)√𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂), is then 
approximated by 𝛷−1(0.975)√𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂). 
3. However, one must take into account that whenever 𝑚 is too small (e.g. 
𝑚<
50), 𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) may not have properly converged to 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂). Finally, 
𝛷−1(0.975)√𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) is estimated by 
𝛷−1(0.975) ∙ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚)∙√𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂), 



where∙ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚) takes into account the fact that 𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) may not 
have properly converged to 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂). 


Details of 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚): 

The parameter 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚) is chosen such that 
𝑃(√𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)<𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚) √𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂))=95% 

holds. More precisely, still under the assumption that 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ has a normal 
distribution, one can write: 

𝑚−1
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)
𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) ~ 𝜒𝑚−12 

(1) 



where 𝜒𝑚−12 denotes a standard chi-squared distribution with 𝑚−1 degrees of 
freedom. 

From (1), we get 𝑃(𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)<𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚)2 𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂))=95% with 

• 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑚)=√
𝑚−1
𝑞(𝑚−1;97.5%) 
, 
• 𝑞(𝑚−1;97.5%) is such that 𝑃(𝑞(𝑚−1;97.5%)≤𝑍)=97.5% with 𝑍~𝜒𝑚−12. 


A.2 
Method 2 


As in the previous section, we denote 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑁(𝛼̂) as the estimator of the EEPE for 
one given netting set 𝛼 obtained from one MC run with N simulations 
(e.g. N = 2000) and, as in the previous section, we simplify the notation 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑁(𝛼̂) 
as 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂. 

The second method to estimate the error on 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ is a method where only one MC 
run is needed (contrary to method 1 where a set of 𝑚 MC runs was needed). 

Before presenting the method for the estimation of the MC error, let us detail some 
definitions and notations. For any time point 𝑡𝑘 of the time grid used for exposure 
calculations, we denote 𝐸(𝑡𝑘) as the netting set exposure at time 𝑡𝑘 and 𝐸𝐸(𝑡𝑘) as 
its expected value. Let 𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡𝑘) be the estimator of 𝐸𝐸(𝑡𝑘) based on the MC run, i.e. 
𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡𝑘)=
1
𝑁
Σ𝐸𝑗(𝑡𝑘),
𝑁
𝑗=1 


where 𝐸𝑗(𝑡𝑘) stands for the netting set exposure level at time 𝑡𝑘 for scenario j. 

The following equations holds if the EEPE is not dominated by the current 
exposure 𝐸(𝑡0), meaning there is at least one 𝑡𝑘 below one year with 
𝐸(𝑡0)< 𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡𝑘), otherwise the numerical error of the EEPE is in any case zero. For 
the sake of simplicity, it is also assumed that 𝐸𝐸(𝑡0)< 𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡1). 


The effective reference dates are the subset of dates 𝑡𝑘 among the simulation dates 
(𝑡ℎ)ℎ>0 such that 
𝐸𝐸(𝑡𝑘)>𝑚𝑎𝑥
0≤ℎ<𝑘
𝐸𝐸(𝑡ℎ) . 

Let us denote (𝑠𝑢)𝑢 these effective reference dates with 
𝑠1<𝑠2<⋯<𝑠𝑢<⋯<𝑠𝑝≤𝑡1𝑦 , 

i.e. p dates. 

For the given MC run, the estimated effective reference dates are the subset of 
dates 𝑡𝑘 among the simulation dates (𝑡ℎ)ℎ>0 such that: 
𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡𝑘)>𝑚𝑎𝑥
0≤ℎ<𝑘
𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡ℎ) 

Let us denote (𝑠𝑢̂)𝑢 these estimated (i.e. as resulting from an MC simulation) 
effective reference dates with: 
𝑠1̂<𝑠2̂<⋯<𝑠𝑢̂<⋯<𝑠𝑝̂̂≤𝑡1𝑦 

i.e. 𝑝̂ dates. 

𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ depends only on the (𝐸𝐸̂(𝑠𝑢̂))
𝑢 
and the time profile of effective EE values as 
defined in Article 284(5) of the CRR. More precisely, it is fully determined by 𝐸𝐸̂(𝑠𝑢̂), 
as can be seen by the following schematic graph: 

Chart A1 
Estimate of EEPE 


 

t0t1t2t3t5t4time 
Effective EE (implied from 
CRR) 
=
= 
1yEE 
==
application period of
𝐸𝐸̂𝑡𝑘
𝑠1̂𝑠2̂𝑠3̂
𝐸𝐸̂𝑠2̂ 


The method below relies on the assumption, which should be checked by the 
institution when applying the method, that N is large enough such that all 𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡𝑘) are 
“sufficiently close” to their true values 𝐸𝐸(𝑡𝑘) and that, as a consequence, the 
effective reference dates are properly identified, i.e. (𝑠𝑢̂)𝑢=(𝑠𝑢)𝑢. 


Under the complementary assumptions that 𝑠𝑝≠𝑡1𝑦, and considering, as previously 
mentioned, that (𝑠𝑢̂)𝑢=(𝑠𝑢)𝑢, 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ is given by:391 
𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂=Σ(𝑣𝑢−𝑣𝑢−1)𝐸𝐸̂(𝑠𝑢)+(𝑡1𝑦−𝑣𝑝−1)𝐸𝐸̂(𝑠𝑝)
𝑝−1
𝑢=1 
=
1
𝑁
Σ[Σ(𝑣𝑢−𝑣𝑢−1)𝐸𝑗(𝑠𝑢)+(𝑡1𝑦−𝑣𝑝−1)𝐸𝑗(𝑠𝑝)
𝑝−1
𝑢=1]
𝑁
𝑗=1 
. 

391 
This assumes the longest-lasting transaction in the netting set has a maturity equal to or higher than 
one year and all time differences in the above formulas are expressed in units of a year (not dividing by 
the minimum between 1y and the netting set maturity for simplicity) 
– otherwise the normalised 
weighting as described in paragraph 
86 needs to be applied. 


Where (𝑣𝑢)𝑢 are the “application period dates”: they are such that [ 𝑣𝑢−1, 𝑣𝑢 ] is the 
period 𝐸𝐸̂(𝑠𝑢) is applied to. For instance, for the case illustrated in the graph above, 
𝐸𝐸̂(𝑠2) is applied on [𝑡1 , 𝑡3], and thus 𝑣1 =𝑡1 and 𝑣2 =𝑡3 . 

Let us define, for each scenario 𝑗 from 1 to 𝑁: 
𝐷𝑗≔Σ(𝑣𝑢−𝑣𝑢−1)𝐸𝑗(𝑠𝑢)+(𝑡1𝑦−𝑣𝑝−1)𝐸𝑗(𝑠𝑝)
𝑝−1
𝑢=1 


By definition of 𝐷𝑗, we have 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂=
1
𝑁
Σ𝐷𝑗
𝑁𝑗
=1. 

For 𝐷:=Σ(𝑣𝑢−𝑣𝑢−1)𝐸(𝑠𝑢)+(𝑡1𝑦−𝑣𝑝−1)𝐸(𝑠𝑝)𝑝−1
𝑢=1, the variance of 𝐷 can be 
estimated by: 
𝑣𝑎𝑟̂(𝐷)=
1
𝑁−1Σ(𝐷𝑗−
1
𝑁
Σ𝐷𝑘
𝑁
𝑘=1)
2𝑁
𝑗=1=
1
𝑁−1Σ(𝐷𝑗−𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)
2
𝑁
𝑗=1 
. 

Note: cases where 𝐸(𝑡0)≥ 𝐸𝐸̂(𝑡1) and/or 𝑠𝑝=𝑡1𝑦 are not derived in this annex. 
However similar equations can be obtained. 

An estimator of the variance of 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ is then given by: 
𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀2̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)=
1
𝑁
𝑣𝑎𝑟̂(𝐷)=
1
𝑁(𝑁−1)
Σ(𝐷𝑗−𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)
2
𝑁
𝑗=1 
. 

As mentioned in the first footnote of paragraph 0 requiring a statistical error at a 95% 
confidence level, the estimation of the MC error on 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ should be calculated 
according to the following formula: 
𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟̂𝑀2(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)∶=𝛷−1(0.975)√𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀2̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) 
≃1.96∙√
1
𝑁(𝑁−1)
Σ(𝐷𝑗−𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂)
2
𝑁
𝑗=1 
. 

The rationale of the formula is the same as that outlined in method 1, with a different 
estimator of the variance of 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ and without a convergence adjustment. If we 
assume that 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂ follows a normal distribution, then 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟̂𝑀2(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂) can be 
interpreted as half of the length of the 95% two-sided confidence interval centred 


around 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂. No adjustment (similar to 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(.) in the first method) is needed, 
since for usual values of 𝑁, we have 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(𝑁) close to 1, e.g. 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(500)≃
1.067 and 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝐴𝑑𝑗(1000)≃1.046. 

A.3 
Aggregation across netting sets 


a) When risk factors are simulated all together (no “silo”), the MC error of the 
estimator of the EEPE for the full scope should be calculated in a similar way to that 
described for a single netting set, except that 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁 should be understood as the 
sum of the estimators of the EEPE related to all netting sets belonging to the 
institution’s portfolio. Assume that a set of n netting sets 𝐴={𝛼1,…,𝛼𝑛} is available 
for the MC error analysis. 

This means for method 1 that 
𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀1̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸𝑁̂)=
1
𝑚−1Σ(Σ𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁𝑘
(𝛼𝑖)
𝛼𝑖∈𝐴
−
1
𝑚
ΣΣ𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁𝑙
𝛼𝑖∈𝐴
(𝛼𝑖)
𝑚
𝑙=1)
2𝑚
𝑘=1 


should be inserted into the equation for 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟̂𝑀1(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂). 

For method 2, the addition needs to happen at the netting set-specific D term. 
𝐷𝑗=Σ𝐷𝑗(𝛼𝑖)
𝛼𝑖∈𝐴 


should be inserted into the equation for 𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑀2̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁) to calculate the variance, 
then this should be inserted into the equation for 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑀2̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁). 

b) When risk factors are not simulated all together (in cases where exposures are 
estimated through “silos”, e.g. one per asset class), the MC error should be derived 
from the MC errors of 𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁 per silo. Using either method 1 or 2 for computing the 
MC error per silo as explained immediately above (item a), the error on the total 
portfolio is then given by: 
𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟̂𝑀1
𝑀2 
(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 )=√Σ(𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑀1
𝑀2̂(𝐸𝐸𝑃𝐸̂𝑁 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑖 ))
2𝑆
𝑖=1 
, 

where 

• 𝑆 is the total number of silos, 
• 𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑖 is a sub-portfolio of the institution’s total portfolio corresponding to all the 
netting sets simulated in silo 𝑖. 



Acronyms 


 


BCBS 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 

CCF 

Conversion factor 

CCR 

Counterparty credit risk 

CF 

Cash flow 

EAD 

Exposure at default 

EBA 

European Banking Authority 

ECB 

European Central Bank 

EL 

Expected loss 

ELBE 

Expected loss best estimate 

EU 

European Union 

IRB 

Internal ratings-based 

IT 

Information technology 

LGD 

Loss given default 

M 

Maturity parameter 

OTC derivative 

Over-the-counter derivative 

SME 

Small and medium-sized enterprise 

PD 

Probability of default 

RR 

Recovery rate 

RTS 

Regulatory Technical Standards 

RWA 

Risk-weighted asset 

RWEA 

Risk-weighted exposure amount 

SSM 

Single Supervisory Mechanism 

TRIM 

Targeted review of internal models 



 



 



Glossary 


General topics 


Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 328 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision “Guidelines: Corporate governance principles for banks” 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) - Newsletter No. 4 
Basel Committee Newsletter No. 4 (January 2005), “Update on work of the Accord Implementation Group related to validation under 
the Basel II Framework” 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) - Newsletter No. 9 
Basel Committee Newsletter No. 9 (September 2006), “The IRB Use Test: Background and Implementation” 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) - Regulatory consistency assessment programme (RCAP) 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision “Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme (RCAP) – Analysis of risk-weighted 
assets for credit risk in the banking book” 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 of 12 March 2014 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards for assessing the materiality of extensions and 
changes of the Internal Ratings Based Approach and the Advanced Measurement Approach (OJ L 148, 20.5.2014, p.36) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/439 of October 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards for the specification of the assessment methodology 
competent authorities are to follow when assessing the compliance of credit institutions and investment firms with the requirements 
to use the Internal Ratings Based Approach (OJ L 90, 18.3.2022, p. 1). 

CRCU 
Credit risk control unit 

CRD IV 
Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit institutions and 
the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 
2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 338) 

CRR 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit 
institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1). For the purposes of this 
document, the reader’s attention is also drawn to the corrigendum published on 30 November 2013 (OJ L 321, 30.11.2013, p. 6) 

EBA Consultation Paper 2014/10 
Consultation Paper “Draft regulatory technical standards on the sequential implementation of the IRB Approach and permanent 
partial use under the Standardised Approach under Articles 148(6), 150(3) and 152(5) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR)” 
(EBA/CP/2014/10) 

EBA Guidelines on internal governance 
Guidelines on internal governance (EBA/GL/2017/11) 

EBA Guidelines on Outsourcing 
EBA Guidelines on outsourcing (EBA/GL/2019/02) 

EBA Guidelines on SREP 
EBA Guidelines on common procedures and methodologies for the supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP) and 
supervisory stress testing under Directive 2013/36/EU (EBA/GL/2022/03) 

Final draft RTS on assessment methodology for IMA and significant share 
Final draft Regulatory Technical Standards on the specification of the assessment methodology for competent authorities regarding 
compliance of an institution with the requirements to use internal models for market risk and assessment of significant share under 
points (b) and (c) of Article 363(4) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA/RTS/2016/07) 

G-SII 
Global systemically important institution 

KPI 
Key performance indicator 

IFRS 
International Financial Reporting Standards 

O-SII 
Other systemically important institution 

PPU 
Permanent partial use 

RDS 

Reference dataset 

RORAC 
Return on risk-adjusted capital 




SA 
Standardised approach 

SLA 
Service level agreement 

SSCA 
Supervisory slotting criteria approach 

SSM Regulation 
Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank concerning 
policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions (OJ L 287, 29.10.2013, p. 63) 



 


Credit risk 


Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 239 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision “Principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting” 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 529/2014 of 12 March 2014 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards for assessing the materiality of extensions and 
changes of the Internal Ratings Based Approach and the Advanced Measurement Approach (OJ L 148, 20.5.2014, p.36) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2021/930 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/930 of 1 March 2021 supplementing the CRR with regard to regulatory technical 
standards specifying the nature, severity and duration of an economic downturn referred to in Article 181(1), point (b), and Article 
182(1), point (b), of that Regulation (OJ L 204, 10.6.2021, p. 1) 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2022/439 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/439 of October 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards for the specification of the assessment methodology 
competent authorities are to follow when assessing the compliance of credit institutions and investment firms with the requirements 
to use the Internal Ratings Based Approach (OJ L 90, 18.3.2022, p. 1) 

CRM 
Credit risk mitigation 

CRR 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit 
institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1). For the purposes of this 
document the reader’s attention is also drawn to the corrigendum published on 30 November 2013 (OJ L 321, 30.11.2013, p. 6) 

EBA Guidelines for the estimation of LGD appropriate for an economic downturn (“Downturn LGD estimation”) 
EBA Guidelines for the estimation of LGD appropriate for an economic downturn (“Downturn LGD estimation”) (EBA/GL/2019/03) 

EBA Guidelines on DoD 
EBA Guidelines on the application of the definition of default under Article 178 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA/GL/2016/07) 

EBA Guidelines on PD and LGD 
EBA Guidelines on PD estimation, LGD estimation and the treatment of defaulted exposures (EBA/GL/2017/16) 

EBA Guidelines on SRT 
EBA Guidelines on Significant Credit Risk Transfer relating to Articles 243 and Article 244 of Regulation 575/2013 
(EBA/GL/2014/05) 

ECB Regulation on options and discretions 
Regulation (EU) 2016/445 of the European Central Bank of 14 March 2016 on the exercise of options and discretions available in 
Union law (ECB/2016/4) (OJ L 78, 24.3.2016, p. 60) 

Corrigendum to the ECB Regulation on discretion on materiality threshold 
Corrigendum to Regulation (EU) 2018/1845 of the European Central Bank of 21 November 2018 on the exercise of the discretion 
under Article 178(2)(d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 in relation to the threshold for assessing the materiality of credit obligations 
past due (ECB/2018/26) (Official Journal of the European Union L 299 of 26 November 2018) (OJ L 217 08.07.2020, p. 8) 

ECB Regulation on discretion on materiality threshold 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1845 of the European Central Bank of 21 November 2018 on the exercise of the discretion under Article 
178(2)(d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 in relation to the threshold for assessing the materiality of credit obligations past due 
(ECB/2018/26) (OJ L 299, 26.11.2018, p. 55–57) 

F-IRB 
Foundation IRB 

GDP 
Gross domestic product 

LRA 
Long-run average 

MoC 
Margin of conservatism 

NACE 
Nomenclature statistique des activités économiques dans la Communauté Européenne 




NUTS 
Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics 

SRM 
Shadow rating model 



 


Market risk 


Actual P&L 
The daily actual changes in the portfolio’s value, as defined in Article 366(3) of the CRR. 

AVA 
Additional valuation adjustment 

CIU 
Collective investment undertaking 

CVA 
Credit valuation adjustment 

CRM 
Comprehensive risk measure 

DVA 
Debit valuation adjustment 

Economic P&L 
The daily changes in the portfolio’s value (or profit and loss, P&L) calculated on the basis of end-of-day mark-to-market or mark-to-
model (depending on the instruments) values of the books and records of the institution, taking into account the independent price 
verification (IPV) process. It is generally calculated using front-office systems (position data, pricing models, valuation methods, 
pricing parameters, end-of-day market data, etc.). 

ETF 
Exchange-traded fund 

FX 
Foreign exchange 

Fundamental review of the trading book (FRTB) 
The document entitled “Minimum capital requirements for market risk” issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS) in January 2019. 

Hypothetical P&L 
The daily hypothetical changes in the portfolio’s value, as defined in Article 366(3) of the CRR. 

IMA 
The internal model approach for the calculation of own funds requirements for market risk. 

IRC 
Incremental default and migration risk charge 

P&L 
The daily changes in the portfolio’s value (or profit and loss). 

Position 
Understood to be a risk position. A risk position is a non-identically-zero sensitivity to a risk factor. Holding securities or entering into 
transaction contracts entails having a position. When defining a position, neither hedging nor netting should be considered. 

Top-of-the-house level 
Both (i) the legal entity for which an approval for the IMA approach has been granted, and (ii) (within the scope of the IMA) the 
highest level of the portfolio structure. 

RNIME 
Risk(s) not-in-the-model engines, as set out in detail in Section 7 of the market risk chapter. In this document, the abbreviation 
“RNIME” may be singular or plural depending on whether it refers to a single risk, several risks, or collectively all risks not captured 
in the model engines. 

VaR 
Value-at-risk 

sVaR 
Stressed VaR 



 


Counterparty credit risk 


Benchmarking system 
In the context of pricing functions mentioned in the guide, this means the respective front-office pricing functions, pricing functions of 
accounting systems or other benchmarks with which front-office prices are frequently compared (at least quarterly, as for CCR 
purposes). Values taken from such benchmarking systems are values after independent price verification (see Article 4(70) of the 
CRR) without any valuation adjustments beyond the default-free value (such as the credit valuation adjustment). 




DMP 
Default management process 

EEPE 
Effective expected positive exposure 

ETC 
Early termination clause 

IM 
Initial margin 

IMM 
Internal Model Method for counterparty credit risk. 

MPOR 
Margin period of risk 

Pricing function 
A dedicated implementation of a pricing model taking into account: 

• the input data used in this particular implementation (e.g. the input market data needed, day-count conventions, etc.); 
• the parametrisation of the implemented pricing model including the method for its calibration; 
• the numerical method used (e.g. binomial tree, finite difference, Monte Carlo, etc.). 


Pricing model 
The quantitative, mathematical model (e.g. a Black 76 swaption) that is used to determine the market value of a transaction for a 
given (current or future) date and specified market conditions/scenarios. 

Representative sub-portfolios 
A subset of all counterparties or netting sets that is representative of the full set at least in terms of: 

• transaction types and their “moneyness”; 
• underlying risk factors; 
• the ratio of the value of short positions to the value of long positions; 
• margin agreement types; 
• the ratio of margined to unmargined netting sets; 


and for which the institution is able to demonstrate to supervisors that the chosen sub-portfolios are sufficiently representative in 
terms of the above criteria and meaningful regarding the purpose for which the portfolio has been selected. 

RNIEPE 
Risk(s) not in effective expected positive exposure, as set out in detail in Section 13 of the counterparty credit risk chapter. In this 
document, the abbreviation “RNIEPE” may be singular or plural depending on whether it refers to a single risk, several risks, or 
collectively all risks inside the IMM which are not yet part of the EEPE or are not adequately captured in EEPE. 

Securities financing transactions (SFTs) 
This term covers repurchase agreements, margin lending and borrowing agreements, as well as securities and commodities lending 
and borrowing agreements. It thus encompasses all products covered by Article 272(25)(a) and (b) of the CRR. 

𝑡0 
The first date of the simulation time grid in the IMM and the reporting date for which the EEPE is calculated. It is thus equal to the 
“current date” referred to in Article 284(5) of the CRR. 

Systematically underestimated exposures 
This expression means a progressive, aggressive or non-conservative modelling of exposures in almost all cases compared with a 
precise treatment without approximations, which may refer to almost all cases of: 

• simulated scenarios; 
• portfolio configurations; 
• market conditions at t0; 
• market conditions during the period used for calibration. 


This holds to the extent that “almost all cases” can be anticipated from past experience or historic time series. Otherwise, this 
expression refers to an a priori estimation, for example resulting from a mathematical consideration. Example: A model 
implementation approximates the true value of a bought vanilla call option inside a netting set by its intrinsic value (the value if 
exercised). Since the true value is always more than the intrinsic value before exercising the option, this modelling would lead to too 
low a transaction value and thus to too low a netting set value; hence, in this specific example, “almost all cases” changes even to 
“always”. 

If the expression is used in the context of the netting set value, it means that modelling/pricing leads in almost all cases to too low an 
overall netting set value, i.e. after applying the netting rules. If it is used in the context of single transaction values, it means that 
transactions with a positive value have in almost all cases too low a value and that transactions with a negative value (if they are 
also inside a netting set) have, in almost all cases, too high an absolute value compared with a precise treatment. 

Validation function 
This expression denotes the staff responsible for performing tasks and setting up processes relevant for the independent initial and 
ongoing model validation, including ongoing reviews of the CCR exposure model and its risk measures. In particular, the term refers 
to both qualitative and quantitative validation, with the latter also including back-testing of the CCR exposure model. 



 


 


© European Central Bank, 2023 


Postal address 
60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Telephone 
+49 69 1344 0 
Website 
www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu 


All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 


For specific terminology please refer to the SSM glossary (available in English only). 





